How to Attain Self-Hypnosis


Let us begin with the hypothesis that anyone can learn and practice, to
some degree, the science of self-hypnosis. We shall assume that you have
carefully thought out what you want to accomplish. You have, through
self-analysis, come up with reasonable goals of therapy and
self-improvement. The next step is the acquisition of the hypnotic
state, per se.

Before giving you the specific instructions, I would like to clarify a
question which invariably arises in teaching a student self-hypnosis. It
is: "Are the suggestions that I give myself as effective as the ones you
would give me in hetero-hypnosis?"

It is natural to assume that the suggestions of the hypnotist would be
more effective than those given by the subject himself, but both have
the same intrinsic value. It is well to remember that all hypnosis is
really self-hypnosis, and all hetero-suggestions are transposed into
self-suggestions. If the hypnotist firmly suggests, "From this moment,
you will feel very confident in all life situations," the subject
automatically and unconsciously rephrases the statement, "From this
moment, I will feel very confident in all life situations." The subject,
ordinarily, mentally or aloud, repeats all suggestions using the pronoun
"I" instead of "you".

The easiest and quickest way to learn self-hypnosis is to be hypnotized
and given a posthypnotic suggestion to the effect that you will be able
to put yourself into the hypnotic state at a given stimulus whenever you
desire to do so. The hypnotist need not be a professional. Anyone
understanding the rudiments of hypnosis can do this. However, let us
assume you want to learn self-hypnosis and cannot find help. If you
understand and consciously practice the instructions that I shall
outline, you will attain your goal.

Sit in an easy chair or recline on a sofa or bed. Next, choose a point
of eye fixation on the ceiling, preferably a spot behind you which would
normally cause eye fatigue or strain. Now, breathe very slowly and
deeply. As you do this, repeat, aloud or mentally, the word "sleep" as
you inhale and "deep sleep" as you exhale. Do this for several minutes
in a very monotonous manner until such time as you find yourself getting
drowsy. Next, suggest to yourself that your eyelids are becoming heavy
and tired. The goal is to acquire eye closure using this method. You
want to reach a state where it is uncomfortable to keep the eyes open.
Once you get your eyes closing, seemingly of their own volition, you
have reached the first step in achieving self-hypnosis.

You can repeat to yourself such suggestions as, "My eyelids are becoming
very heavy and tired ... My eyes are becoming very watery ... My eyelids
are blinking ... I just want to close my eyes ... The moment I close my
eyelids, I shall fall into a deep, sound, hypnotic sleep ... Even though
in a deep state of hypnosis, I shall be aware of my surroundings and be
able to direct posthypnotic suggestions to my subconscious mind."

When your eyelids actually become heavy or when your eyes actually begin
to water, you intensify these feelings by repeating affirmative
suggestions along these very lines. This is known as "the feed-back
technique" and helps to reinforce the actual condition that exists.
Proceeding in this way hastens the actual closing of the eyes and
attainment of the hypnotic state, per se.

Let us assume that you practice this procedure and seemingly nothing
happens. Continue to practice it again and again until such time as you
are able to achieve an eye closure. You will eventually be able to do
this within a relatively short period of time.

One of the best times to practice the technique just given is when you
are falling asleep at night. The lights are out and you are lying in
bed. Choose an imaginary spot above and behind your eye level so there
is some strain on the eye muscles. Now begin giving yourself suggestions
that your eyelids are becoming heavy, etc.

The reason this period is such an excellent time to practice
self-hypnosis is that the suggestions you give yourself spill over into
your subconscious as you drift from consciousness to unconsciousness.
It's like telling yourself to wake up at a certain time in the morning.
The suggestion reaches your subconscious and activates you consciously
to waken. Using this approach, you can give yourself dynamic,
constructive suggestions at this time as well as giving yourself the
posthypnotic suggestion that the next time you practice self-hypnosis,
you will fall into a deeper, sound, hypnotic state at the count of
three. You also emphasize that your eyelids will close involuntarily
whenever you relax for five minutes and afterwards count to three. This
conditioning process will be augmented by the use of the sleep period.
The suggestions will tend to work unconsciously during this period and
hasten your attainment of the constructive goals as well as the
self-hypnotic goal itself.

Once you have achieved eye closure, deepen the hypnotic state by the
following suggestions: "As I count to three, I shall go deeper and
deeper into a profound, hypnotic state. As I count to three, I shall
find myself becoming more and more relaxed. As I count to three, I shall
fall into a deep, hypnotic sleep." You repeat these suggestions many
times, actually trying on a conscious level to feel sleepier, more
relaxed, more at ease. In doing this, you take on the characteristics of
a deeply hypnotized subject.

Part of the difficulty in learning self-hypnosis is that the subject is
aiming at a state of mind in which he has no experience. If I say, "Act
happy" or "Act sad," there is an immediate reaction from your
experiential background, and you can react accordingly. If you have
never seen anyone hypnotized and I say, "Act as though you were
hypnotized," you must, of necessity, act in a manner that you would
assume approximated that of hypnosis. If you had actually seen someone
hypnotized, you would naturally take on the characteristics you had
observed. This would either be done consciously or unconsciously.

Some individuals describe the hypnotic state as a state of "complete
relaxation." Many get a feeling of "detachment;" others a feeling of
"disassociation," as though their entire being was only thought. Some
get a "floating" or "drifting" feeling, likening the experience to
lying on deep clouds. Others experience a heavy, pleasant, "sinking"
feeling. Still others get a feeling of "peace and serenity." Many
describe the hypnotic state as being akin to the state just prior to
falling asleep or like daydreaming, and they experience the same
reactions. Yet, there are some who do not feel a definite change. They
describe it by saying, "I just felt that I had my eyes closed. I heard
everything and was completely aware at all times." Since it is possible
to direct your feelings (reactions), I would suggest that you aim for a
completely relaxed, comfortable state.

You have now reached the point where your eyes are closed, and you have
given yourself further suggestions to deepen the state of hypnosis. This
has taken from about six to ten minutes. You are not sure, though, that
you are under hypnosis. There are many ways to test this, and I shall
outline one of these tests later in this chapter; however, for your
initial attempts, it isn't too important whether or not you are under
hypnosis. You are still to give yourself the posthypnotic suggestion
that the next time you attempt to hypnotize yourself you will fall into
a deeper and sounder state after you have relaxed for about five minutes
and counted to three.

In your initial attempts, you will be trying to establish a conditioned
response to the count of three which will subsequently cause your eyes
to close and put you under hypnosis. Eventually, you should react
instantly to the count of three or any other cue you may use to trigger
the response. The key words or stimulus become associated with the
action that you seek. Through repetition, just thinking about the
stimulus can bring on the response. This is known as ideomotor action
and is present in the waking as well as the hypnotic state. Pavlov's
famous experiments which induced dogs to salivate when a bell was rung
after previously having had food fed to them at the same time are
examples of this type of conditioning. Don't we generally become hungry
if someone tells us it's noon and time for lunch when, in fact, it's
only 11 o'clock?

I had a common experience recently that I am sure many readers have
shared. One of my neighbors, seeing my car was parked in front of my
house and knowing I was home, called to say he was dropping in to see
me. While working on the manuscript of this book, I thought I heard the
doorbell as I was typing. I went to the front door and no one was there.
I even walked around the house looking for him because I was so certain
I heard the bell. This is another example of an ideomotor action. I told
my friend about it when he arrived approximately 30 minutes later. He
looked at me rather whimsically, and we both shared a laugh. Haven't you
thought you heard the phone ring when you were waiting for a call?

In the chapter, "How Does Self-Hypnosis Work," stress was laid on the
importance of the visual-imagery technique. During every attempt to
achieve self-hypnosis, you attempt to visualize yourself going into the
hypnotic state. Once you have deepened the state, you begin the process
of visualizing yourself exactly the way you want to be. You may
experience difficulty at first, but as you keep at it, you will be able
to picture yourself the way you want. _You use the visual-imagery
technique whether you think you are under hypnosis or not._ These images
become clear as you constantly hammer home these suggestions. This is
the exact procedure necessary, and you needn't complicate it.

Let us suppose that you are getting your eyelids to close at the count
of three and have achieved a good state of relaxation. With these
prerequisites, you can anticipate going deeper into the hypnotic state.
Actually, being able to get the eyes to close at a specific count is the
first test in determining if the subject has gone under hypnosis. If you
have conditioned yourself this far, then you can go to the next step.
The next test is called the "swallowing" test. You mentally give
yourself suggestions that as you slowly, to yourself, count to 10, you
will get an irresistible urge to swallow one time. You further suggest
that this will happen even before you reach the count of 10. You then
begin the count. "One ... My throat is parched, and I feel an
irresistible urge to swallow one time. Two ... My lips are becoming very
dry, and I feel an irresistible urge to swallow. Three ... My throat
feels very dry, and I feel an irresistible urge to swallow one time.
Four ... Before I reach the count of 10, the urge to swallow one time
will become irresistible because my lips and throat are so dry. Five ...
Once I swallow, I shall no longer have the urge to swallow again, and as
I swallow one time, I shall fall into a deeper and sounder state of
hypnosis." Continue with similar suggestions, repeating and affirming
the suggestions about swallowing. Once you actually swallow, you
discontinue the suggestions and, instead, give yourself suggestions that
you are falling deeper and deeper into a sound hypnotic state and that
the constructive suggestions you now give yourself will work for you.
Once again you practice visual-imagery, seeing yourself the way you want
to be, while fortifying this image with forceful, positive suggestions.
You close by giving yourself suggestions that you will enter the
hypnotic state whenever you relax for five minutes and count to three.

The suggestions are just as effective whether given aloud or mentally.
Many subjects report that they are reluctant when it comes to giving
suggestions to themselves. I can only say that as you continue to work
with yourself, you will develop confidence in giving yourself
suggestions. In order for the suggestions to be effective, they cannot
be given in a reticent or hesitant manner. They must be given with
enthusiasm and anticipation. If you assiduously follow these
instructions, you will derive the benefits you seek in the shortest
possible time and witness the positive, tangible results of your
suggestions and efforts. In the next chapter, you'll learn how to deepen
the self-hypnotic state.