Techniques for Reaching the Somnambulistic State


As indicated in the last chapter, the attainment of the somnambulistic
stage of hypnosis can represent an extremely intricate procedure.
Because of certain inherent characteristics of this stage, it is easier
to attain by hetero-hypnosis. However, this does not preclude the fact
that it can be reached without the aid of a hypnotist. More important
than the testing and deepening procedures that I shall outline for you
in this chapter are an _understanding_ and an _awareness_ of some of the
complexities involved, first in achieving the hypnotic state, then
deepening, and, finally, reaching somnambulism. There are no absolute or
final answers to many of the problems that can arise. You can become
entangled with rationalization so easily when you want the facts to fit
a particular theory. I point this out to the reader because, as the
subject goes deeper, the procedure can become more complicated.

There are many interesting phenomena which can be elicited in the
somnambulistic state. They are of interest for the most part, to
students of abnormal behavior and are pertinent from an academic
viewpoint. They do not fall within the province of this book or of
hypnosis for therapeutic purposes and might lead the reader astray.
Should readers be interested in further hypnotic phenomena, I refer them
to _Modern Hypnosis_ by Leslie Kuhn and Salvadore Russo, Ph.D.,
_Experimental Hypnosis_ by Leslie LeCron, _Time Distortion in Hypnosis_
by Milton Erickson, M.D. and Lynn F. Cooper, M.D., and _Hypnotism--An
Objective Study in Suggestibility_ by André M. Weitzenhoffer, Ph.D.

As discussed previously, some individuals experience difficulty in
attaining the deeper hypnotic states. My advice is to be patient and to
continue working with yourself. It is not imperative or vital to reach
the somnambulistic stage for therapeutic results. It is a misconception
on the part of many students that they must go into the deepest state
possible to obtain results. Dramatic changes can come about at all
levels of hypnosis. The somnambulistic state is necessary in
hypnotherapy when there is a need for the patient to relive some
traumatic episode. It is also useful when the patient is reluctant to
consciously discuss certain aspects of his problem. Many
hypnotherapeutic techniques such as amnesia, hypermnesia, progression,
paramnesia, automatic writing, dream induction, regression, production
of experimental conflicts and crystal or mirror gazing require a
somnambulistic state. For those of you interested in hypnotherapy, I can
recommend no finer book than _Hypnotherapy of War Neuroses_ by John G.
Watkins, Ph.D. In this book, the theory of hypnotherapy has been
diagramatically presented for easy comprehension and shown to be an
amalgamation of concepts and practices from various schools of thought.

Most students of hypnosis equate the phenomenon of amnesia with the
somnambulistic state. The mistake they make is in trying to achieve
amnesia. It's similar to the dog trying to catch his tail. It is
impossible for the subject to effectively suggest amnesia to himself. If
he remembers what he was supposed to forget, he has failed. If he truly
doesn't remember what he was supposed to forget, he doesn't even
remember the amnesia suggestion and can take no satisfaction from his
success because he is not aware that he has accomplished the
posthypnotic suggestion. Unless an elaborate set of posthypnotic
suggestions are worked out, it is an impossible test for self-hypnosis.

I know the reader is anxious to begin his conditioning for the
somnambulistic state, but there are still a few pertinent remarks which
should be remembered before proceeding further. The reader should not
memorize verbatim any of the tests involved in proving the
somnambulistic state. All that is necessary to remember is the general
form and the goal you seek. The goal is to increase your suggestibility
which, in turn, means deepening of the hypnotic state. After each step,
you are to give yourself suggestions that you will go still deeper the
next time. You should also designate a specific length of time to work
with self-hypnosis. The suggestions are as follows: "I shall work with
self-hypnosis for 15 minutes. At the end of that time, I shall open my
eyes and wake up feeling wonderfully well. I'll be wide awake and
refreshed. In case of any danger, I'll be able to awaken immediately and
act accordingly."

Some hypnotists tell their subjects to "make your mind a blank." I
suppose what they really mean is that you must try to think of only what
the hypnotist is saying. Have you ever tried to make your mind a blank?
Try it for a moment. It's an impossibility. Should the hypnotist
persist along these lines, he'll never be successful. It is the wrong
approach. The subject, because of his inability to comply with this
suggestion, is fighting a losing battle. It is also almost impossible
for the subject to concentrate only on what the hypnotist is saying. Any
word the hypnotist says can start a conscious as well as unconscious
train of thought. Therefore, in reality, this, too, is impossible.
However, it really isn't necessary that the subject keep his thoughts
concentrated solely on what is being said so long as they are kept in
the general area. At times, the more you try to concentrate, the more
your thoughts become scattered. Suppose I say to you, "Forget the
address 8721 Sunset Boulevard." What happens? The more you try to forget
it, the more you remember it. Therefore, don't be concerned if you
experience stray thoughts during the induction and deepening of
hypnosis. You are now ready to continue with further tests. The first
five tests should be mastered before continuing.

Test No. 6 is referred to as the "fly" test. In this test, once under
hypnosis, you picture that a fly is crawling on the back of your right
or left hand. Once you feel the fly, you know you are deeply hypnotized.
You might even get an urge to move your hand and flick the fly off your
hand. When this happens, you know, of course, that you are deeply
hypnotized. Here is a sample of the type of suggestions to give:

"As I count to ten and even before I reach the count of ten, I shall
feel a fly crawling on the back of my right hand. This illusion will
seem very real to me. One ... My right hand is completely relaxed. Two
... I feel completely at ease. Three ... I am beginning to feel a
pleasant tingling feeling on the back of my right hand. Four ... This
feeling is becoming strong. Five ... It feels as though a fly is moving
on the back of my hand. Six ... I have had this same feeling before.
Seven ... I can feel the fly. Eight ... The feeling is very definite.
Nine ... As I flick my hand the fly will disappear (If you have felt the
fly, move your hand). Ten ... It is gone."

Test No. 7 is known as the "cigarette" test and naturally is only for
those of you who smoke. In this test, you give yourself posthypnotic
suggestions during the hypnotic state, awaken yourself, and then note
the effects of the posthypnotic suggestions. If the cigarette tastes
bitter or has a repugnant taste or odor, and if you furthermore find it
impossible to smoke more than three puffs, necessitating your putting
out the cigarette, you know the posthypnotic suggestions are working
perfectly and that you are an excellent hypnotic subject. Here are the
suggestions to give yourself while you are under hypnosis:

"When I count to three, I shall open my eyes and wake up feeling
wonderfully well and shall have a strong desire to smoke a cigarette.
Upon lighting the cigarette, I shall notice that there is a very bitter,
strong and repugnant taste to the cigarette. As I continue to smoke the
cigarette, the distasteful effect will become stronger and stronger.
Even though I realize that I have given myself these posthypnotic
suggestions, they will exert a strong force outside of my conscious
control, and I shall find it necessary to extinguish the cigarette after
three puffs. As I now count to three, I shall open my eyes and wake up
feeling fine. One, two, three."

Test No. 8 is called the "sun" test. In this test, you picture yourself
in a bathing suit, shorts or playsuit at the beach or some other
familiar place taking a sunbath. You imagine that it is a beautiful
summer day. As you see yourself relaxed, you imagine that a cloud is
blocking out the sun, but as you count to three, the cloud will move
away and you will feel the warm, pleasant glow of the sun's rays on your
face and hands. Here are the suggestions you can use:

"As I count to three, I shall feel the warm, pleasant rays of the sun on
my face and hands. One ... The cloud is moving, and I can begin to feel
the warm, pleasant rays of the sun. Two ... The cloud is moving more and
more, exposing more and more of the sun. I can feel the warmth of the
sun's rays. Three ... The cloud has moved away from the sun, and I can
feel the full, warm strength of the sun. It is a pleasant feeling, but
as I continue to count to five, the warm feeling will dissipate. Four
... The warm feeling is leaving. Five ... The warm feeling has left, and
I feel perfectly normal in every respect."

A variation of this test is to see yourself lying comfortably in front
of a fireplace. In this instance, you imagine someone is adding wood to
the fire. As this is done, you feel the warm glow of the fire more and
more. Should you use the fireplace technique, try to incorporate the
sound of rain into the picture. If you "hear" rain you have created a
positive auditory hallucination and can consider yourself an excellent
subject.

You can also visualize a situation where you would be cold. This is not
as pleasant as the picture that one can conjure up about a fireplace and
thus creates a bit more resistance since no one wants to feel
uncomfortable.

Test No. 9 is the "breeze" test. It can be combined with the previous
test. After you attain the feeling of warmth, you give yourself a count
of three (or whatever number you want), suggesting that you will feel
the cool ocean breeze (if you are at the beach) on your face and hands.
You can even carry this step further, suggesting that you'll even smell
the odor of the salt water. This is known as an olfactory illusion and
should you be able to create this effect, you can be sure that you are a
somnambulistic subject. Here are suggestions you can use:

"As I count to three, I shall gradually feel the cool ocean breeze
coming over the waves. It will be a very pleasant feeling. One ... I am
beginning to feel the cool ocean breeze, especially on my face and
hands. Two ... The breeze is becoming stronger and stronger. Three ... I
can definitely feel the cool ocean breeze. As I continue to count to
five, I shall smell the pleasant, healthy aroma of the salt water. Four
... I am beginning to smell the salt water. Five ... I can definitely
smell the salt water."

Now you give yourself appropriate suggestions that the feeling
(illusion) will vanish as you awaken or at a specific count. It can be
as simple as this: "As I count to three, I shall open my eyes and awaken
feeling very refreshed. The feeling of the cool ocean breeze and smell
of the salt air will have vanished completely." At this point you count
to three and open your eyes.

Test No. 10 is the "handclasp" test. This is used frequently to test the
depth of hypnosis. You fold your hands with your fingers tightly
interlocked and place your palms together. You then give yourself a
hypnotic suggestion that at the count of three, it will be impossible
for you to unlock your hands. After you try and are unable to unlock
your hands, you continue counting to five, suggesting that you will be
able to do so when you reach the count of five. Incidentally, you should
remove any ring you may be wearing before trying this test. Here are the
suggestions you can follow:

"As I complete the count of three, I shall try to unlock my hands but
will be unable to do so until I count to five. One ... My hands are
locked tightly together. Two ... My fingers are locked tighter and
tighter. Three ... It is impossible for me to unlock my hands until I
count to five. Four ... As I reach the count of five, I shall be able to
unlock my hands very easily. Five ... I can now unlock my hands very
easily."

Test No. 11 is the "arm" test. Here is another test used frequently to
test the receptiveness to hypnosis. Make a tight fist and extend your
arm in front of you as far as possible. Visualize your arm as one solid
mass, as stiff and rigid as a bar of steel. After your arm is extended,
give yourself a hypnotic suggestion that you will be unable to bend your
arm when you complete the count of three. As you continue to count to
five, you will be able to bend your arm very easily. Here is a form of
suggestion you can use:

"As I reach the count of three, I shall try to bend my arm, but it will
be impossible to do so until I count to five. No matter how hard I try,
it will be absolutely impossible. One ... My arm is stiff and rigid as a
bar of steel. Two ... I can feel the rigidity in my arm. Three ... It is
impossible for me to bend my arm until I count to five. Four ... I can
feel the stiffness slowly leaving. Five ... I can now bend my arm easily
and it feels normal in every respect."

Test No. 12 is the "eye" test. This is probably the most widely used
test in hypnosis. Many subjects equate the inability to open the eyes
with hypnosis. Many assume that if they can open their eyes, they have
not been hypnotized. I must emphatically point out that this is not
true. The subject can fail the eye test and yet have been under
hypnosis. In the deep, somnambulistic state, the subject can open his
eyes without affecting the depth of the hypnotic state. In fact, this is
done many times in getting the subject to do automatic writing, crystal
gazing, mirror gazing, hypnodrama and revivification. In carrying out
posthypnotic suggestions in any state, the subject is frequently told
that he will open his eyes and carry out the suggestion.

I have found that there is more anxiety connected with the eye test than
with any other test. I feel that it is a normal reaction and one that
must be anticipated by the hypnotist as well as the subject.
Occasionally, while hypnotizing a new subject, he will open his eyes.
This can happen when the subject feels he is losing consciousness. His
ability to open his eyes proves to him that he is in control. One of the
main fears that the subject has is his belief that he will lose
voluntary control of himself. The fact that he can open his eyes lessens
his anxiety.

If there seems to be too much threat to the individual, I use a method
that you can follow. Instead of suggesting that the subject will be
unable to open his eyes at a specific count, I suggest that he will be
so relaxed that it will be too much effort to open his eyes until a
further count is given. Actually, what could take less effort? Here are
suggestions you can use:

"As I count to three, I shall try to open my eyes, but I shall be unable
to do so because I feel so relaxed. It will just take too much effort to
open my eyes until I reach the count of five or tell myself to awaken.
One ... My eyes are closed, and I am in a very deep state of hypnosis.
Two ... My eyelids are stuck tightly together. Three ... It is now
impossible for me to open my eyes. I shall be able to open them though
at the count of five. Four ... I shall be able to open my eyes very
easily at the count of five. Five ... I can now open my eyes and wake
up feeling alert and fully refreshed."

In accomplishing the eye test, you try to create a vivid picture of
yourself being completely and fully relaxed. If you really exerted a
great deal of effort, you could open your eyes, but because of the
pleasantness of the completely relaxed state, you prefer not to do so.
It can be likened to your enduring the cold winter air when you are half
asleep in bed instead of getting up to close the window which has been
left open too much. You can, of course, get up and close the window, but
it becomes a matter of expending too much energy. Instead, you choose to
endure the discomfort or suggest that your spouse close the window.

For the following three tests, you give yourself the suggestions as
outlined in the previous tests. It should be pointed out again that at
the conclusion of the test, you give yourself a suggestion that you will
feel normal in every respect.

Test No. 13 is the "music" test. This test involves creating an auditory
hallucination. Give yourself the suggestion that at a specific count you
will hear your favorite song. It will last for one minute and then fade
out.

Test No. 14 is the "dream" test. It is incorporated in a great deal of
hypnotherapy. The subject is told that as the hypnotist counts to three,
the subject will have a dream lasting for several minutes which he will
remember. This dream, furthermore, will call his attention to an
important incident that he has long forgotten, yet which will be
relevant to his problem. In self-hypnosis, you suggest to yourself that
at a specific count you will have a very pleasant dream lasting for
several minutes, at the end of which time you will awaken feeling
refreshed. For those readers further interested in producing dreams, I
can highly recommend a very fascinating book called _The Experimental
Production of Dreams During Hypnosis_ by Professor David Ballin Klein.

Test No. 15 is the "anesthesia" test. This is conducted by telling
yourself that you will not feel the pain associated with the act of
pinching yourself. You suggest that you will feel the pressure of your
fingers but will not feel the pain involved. _I urge the reader not to
stick pins in himself to test the anesthesia. This can be dangerous,
lead to infection and cause other harmful results._ You should also not
dig your nails into your skin to make sure that you don't feel pain.