Psychological Aids and Their Function


Psychological or mechanical aids are used to help put the subject in a
state of hypnosis. The use of the aids helps increase the suggestibility
of the subject toward hypnosis. The two most widely used hypnotic aids
are the crystal ball and chain and the 12-inch hypnodisc. One reason is
that these two items have no other use or function outside of the area
of hypnosis. Therefore, when the hypnotist proceeds to use one of these
hypnotic devices, it must follow that a certain mental set, readiness,
or receptivity must follow as a result of its introduction into the
hypnotic setting. If the subject is uneasy about the hypnotic setting or
his response, the introduction of the hypnotic aid can mobilize the
subject's defenses which may be on a conscious or unconscious level.
Generally, the mental set which follows helps augment whatever hypnotic
suggestions are given. Certainly the same mental set would not follow if
the hypnotist used a paper clip as a means of helping with the induction
of hypnosis. It would only start the subject wondering about the
relationship of the paper clip to hypnosis. It obviously isn't in
keeping with what the subject expects.

It is important to utilize the subject's expectation as to what he
believes takes place in the setting as long as this expectation does not
hinder the induction of hypnosis. The mere act of turning down the
lights or drawing the curtains before the hypnotist begins to work with
the subject is a non-verbal suggestion which can be considered as a
psychological aid. The subject knows that the hypnotist is ready to
begin at this point. Actually, it isn't necessary to darken the room at
any time to induce hypnosis. Doesn't the stage hypnotist work with
glaring lights? The room is darkened (and I might add that I use this
procedure myself) mainly for the psychological effect. If I feel that
this procedure might cause anxiety, I proceed with the room undarkened.

In discussing psychological aids, it is agreed that we are primarily
interested in seeing the subject feel better or achieve whatever goals
he seeks through the intelligent application of self-hypnosis. If a
hypnotic aid will help the subject achieve hypnosis, we can concur it is
justified. It is not to be considered a subterfuge. If the physician
administers a placebo to a patient with the remark, "Here is a new
medication that can help your condition" and if this technique does help
alleviate the patient's condition, it is considered good medicine.

You know beforehand that in using the 12-inch hypnodisc, the subject's
eyes must begin to water, his eyelids must get heavy, and eventually he
must close them. Even before you begin to use the hypnodisc, you suggest
that these conditions will take place. During the induction of hypnosis,
as these reactions are noted by the subject, a favorable, psychological
attitude automatically develops which, in turn, helps further
suggestions. If the subject reacts favorably to suggestions A, B, and C,
it follows that he is more prone to accept suggestions D, E, and F which
are therapeutic in nature. The subject can relate better to the latter
suggestions when he has seen proof of his initial suggestibility. This
approach works better than beginning immediately with the latter
suggestions. The build-up of suggestions convinces the subject he is in
a heightened state of suggestibility and can benefit from the
therapeutic suggestions of the hypnotist or his own. Perhaps this needed
assurance is so helpful because it eliminates the anxiety of the subject
concerning his suggestibility. He seeks and needs the satisfaction of
knowing he has attained the prerequisites necessary before any
therapeutic program can benefit him. The subject's prerequisites need
not be actually related to the hypnotic process, per se, but merely
match his preconceived ideas about what is necessary. Let me give you an
example.

Many subjects feel that they must experience amnesia before they can
benefit from hypnotic suggestions. This premise is inaccurate since
favorable and lasting results can be achieved in any degree of hypnosis,
depending, of course, on the nature of the problem. Let me relate
several interesting occurrences that take place every so often in my own
practice as a professional hypnotist. A subject who is responding well
to hypnosis, but not to the point of amnesia, insists that he will not
benefit until he is "knocked out" and doesn't remember what happened.
Trying to convince him otherwise proves fatal. He just refuses to accept
whatever explanation you give him. My own method is not to insist that
the subject is wrong, but somehow to use his misconception in a
constructive manner. After getting him into a cataleptic state, I
suggest that I am going to stop talking for five minutes, during which
time he is to mentally repeat "sleep" as he slowly and deeply inhales
and "deep sleep" as he slowly exhales. At the end of this time, he'll be
in a very deep hypnotic state. Instead of remaining quiet for five
minutes, I take ten minutes. I then begin to whisper suggestions to the
subject to determine if he is still under hypnosis or asleep. If he is
asleep, I let him remain asleep for a still longer period of time, after
which interval I awaken him. I ask him if he remembers what I said to
him during the time he was deeply hypnotized. If he says, "No," I
remark, "Very good." I further point out to him that he has now
experienced amnesia and will now make rapid strides. The subject, on the
other hand, is pleased to see that I now agree with him, and, in fact,
the interesting result is that he does make excellent progress because
his preconceived requirements have been met. It should be pointed out
that I keep working with the subject until such time that he falls
asleep. The transition from hypnosis to sleep is normal. It is easy for
the subject to fall asleep because he is so relaxed.

Let me tell you of a similar experience. Before telling you of this
psychological technique, it is only fair to point out that the
professional hypnotist varies his approach from subject to subject, not
only to suit the needs of the subject but to break the monotony of using
only a few successful procedures. His experimentation helps develop not
only new procedures, but new concepts relative to the general nature of
hypnosis and its many ramifications. I was interested to see what would
happen to a subject if he thought he was deeply hypnotized without ever
giving him verbal suggestions or reassurance that he would feel better
or overcome his problem. Of course, if the technique did not work
quickly, I would drop the procedure for a more orthodox approach.
Instead of trying to really hypnotize the subject, my aim is to get him
to sleep. Once he is asleep, I let him remain so for about 30 minutes.
Without having ever given him a therapeutic suggestion, I awaken him and
inquire if he remembered what happened. If the answer is, "No," I tell
him I'll "hypnotize" him again next week and this concludes the visit.
When he returns next week, I ask him, "How did you feel during the
week?" The answer is generally, "Much better." I keep repeating this
procedure until such time that the individual has attained the goals
that he seeks.

I know that the reader may be surprised that I would divulge such an
unconventional procedure. The principle is the same as the physician
using a placebo. I do so to illustrate the point that I made earlier in
this chapter that so long as certain of the subject's requirements are
met, whether valid or invalid, the subject's suggestibility is greatly
enhanced. Naturally, the unsuspecting subject equated the period of not
remembering, which was, as we know, true sleep, with the somnambulistic
state. Actually, he was helped by self-hypnosis because he felt he would
now make progress because he proved to be such an excellent subject. It
is true, he was not using self-hypnosis as has been outlined in this
book, but he had now achieved a heightened state of suggestibility
(hypnosis) and was using this state to further his own ends.

The attainment of self-hypnosis can be an intricate and elusive
procedure as I have already pointed out. The purpose of the entire book
is to instruct, point out and give you the necessary understanding and
knowledge required to achieve this end. Without this understanding, this
can become a very frustrating effort. It is hoped that by understanding
and being aware of some of the ramifications of hypnosis, you will be
able to achieve your goal in the quickest possible time. It should also
be pointed out that no two subjects react in the same way and that
different methods and requirements are necessary to suit the individual.
It is a mistake to try to make the subject adhere to a rigid
methodology. The greater flexibility of the hypnotic procedures, the
greater the chance for success. Let me, at this time, further discuss
some of the hypnotic aids that are used in the induction of hypnosis.

We have already discussed the use of the hypnodisc and crystal ball and
chain. The same principles are involved in any other object which is
used as a means of fixation or of tiring the eyes. Hypnotic phonograph
records and hypnotic tape recordings represent new devices that have
been instrumental in conditioning subjects for self-hypnosis. The
subject plays the record or tape on his phonograph or tape recorder and
is conditioned over a period of time to respond to hypnosis at a given
signal or phrase. He, in turn, can change this key phrase to one of his
own choosing. Should you own or have access to a tape recorder, I would
suggest recording an induction of hypnosis and playing it back to
yourself in this manner as though you were hypnotizing someone else.

I have produced three different hypnotic records and a 30-minute
hypnotic tape containing the three records which are sold commercially.
One record, called the Musical Hypnotic Record, has a very pleasant,
relaxing musical background as the voice of the hypnotist induces
hypnosis. The second record, called the Metronome Hypnotic Record,
incorporates the monotonous and lulling beat of an electric metronome in
the background. The subject is instructed to mentally repeat "sleep" as
he slowly inhales and "deep sleep" as he slowly exhales in rhythm with
the beat of the metronome. While the subject is concentrating on this
activity, the voice of the hypnotist induces hypnosis. The third record,
called Self-Hypnosis Record No. 3, contains only the voice of the
hypnotist inducing hypnosis. It features a unique approach and
technique.

I have had a great deal of correspondence with those who have used these
phonograph records and the hypnotic tape for conditioning themselves for
self-hypnosis. The results are quite interesting and run the range of
immediate results to no results. One person wrote that one of the
records hypnotized him at the first playing and conditioned him for
self-hypnosis, whereas he had failed to respond to hypnosis after many
visits to one of the country's foremost authorities. I have had similar
experiences after having failed to hypnotize a subject despite many
attempts. I can only speculate that the subjects in these cases
unconsciously resist the hypnotist because they feel a personal threat.
Since the record is impersonal, they are better able to relax and
subsequently be hypnotized. Interestingly, this occurred when the
subject was convinced that he was a very difficult subject. It would
seem that only then was the conditioned response pattern finally
established. The basic function of the hypnotic records and hypnotic
tape is to establish a conditioned response pattern to a given stimulus.
In time, most subjects are conditioned by the intelligent and systematic
use of these recordings.

Let me describe another varied approach to achieving self-hypnosis. One
of the chief assets of a good hypnotist is to be flexible in his
approach in hypnotizing his subjects. As I have already pointed out, it
is necessary many times to adopt a technique that is suitable to the
subject and not to make the subject adapt himself to the method of
induction.

We know that with somnambulistic subjects any procedure will put the
subject under hypnosis immediately. The hypnotist gains complete control
of his subject as the subject is able to put himself in the proper
psychological frame of mind for hypnosis. Unfortunately, most subjects
do not respond at the first session or sessions because of conscious or
subconscious fears that must be gradually eliminated. Once you get the
subject to relax, or "let go," he will naturally succumb to hypnosis.
This is the problem that confronts all hypnotists.

Merely suggesting to the subject to relax is not sufficient, as a rule,
to bring about this desired mental state. The subject, at this point,
cannot easily turn on or off his mental and physical feelings. Even if
we have the subject lie down, this does not assure the hypnotic state as
the subject can still be tense. Our main problem is to get the subject
relaxed. Our situation is similar to the physician telling his patient
to go home and forget about a certain problem. I'm sure you'll agree
that the advice is virtually impossible to follow.

One of the major stumbling blocks in hypnotizing a subject or in
self-hypnosis lies in the fact that although we use terms such as
"relax," "let yourself go," and others, the subject cannot readily put
the meaning of these words into effect. It is difficult for most people
to let go when we live in a society that beckons us to "look sharp," "be
sharp," "be alert," "be on the ball" and "make every minute count."
Emphasis on productivity does not lend to a society of relaxed
individuals.

In my long experience as a professional hypnotist, I have tried many
novel innovations for inducing hypnosis and teaching individuals
self-hypnosis. Some have met with a great deal of success and others
have failed. It is, furthermore, difficult to determine the causal
factors for success or failure. We can only theorize.

I have used the following unorthodox technique for about a period of 15
years. Exceptionally good results have been attained with it, although
it must be admitted that it is not infallible. It is suggested to you as
another good technique. In order to help the subject relax, I have been
using a phonograph record or tape that I recorded containing the
continuous sound of various degrees of rain. One side has a half hour of
very soft, light rainfall such as you have experienced in listening to
rain falling on grass, canvas or a tent top. The other side or track
contains a half hour of rain effects such as one would hear in a heavy
downfall with loud splatterings of water on the pavement. The record and
tape were originally designed to help insomnia sufferers and later
incorporated into the hypnotic procedure.

The subject is instructed to close his eyes and listen to the sound of
the rain while picturing himself relaxing near a warm, glowing
fireplace. As you can note, the subject again incorporates the
visual-imagery technique. The relaxing effect thus produced over a
period of time enhances his chances of success in attaining a deep,
hypnotic state.

There are many other interesting and unique devices and aids you can use
for inducing hypnosis. Rather than present them all in this book, I have
fully described them and their technique of operation in a 144-page
illustrated catalog. This catalog not only contains a list of hypnotic
aids, but a description and listing of over 450 hypnotism and self-help
books. Upon request, I shall be pleased to send it to you. Write to:
Melvin Powers, 12015 Sherman Road, No. Hollywood, California 91605 and
ask for Hypnotic Catalog No. 7. Should you have any questions on
self-hypnosis or hetero-hypnosis, I shall be pleased to answer you.