Is Hypnosis the Answer?


Dr. George Estabrooks, professor of psychology at Colgate University and
author of the book, _Hypnotism_, made the following two statements in a
paper called "The Future of Hypnosis" given as part of a program on "The
Nature of Hypnosis" at the annual meeting of the American Psychological
Association in 1959:

"It would be well to sound a word of caution against certain attitudes
which have become prevalent and which can be well illustrated in the
field of medicine. In this respect, direct suggestion is under the ban.
For example, a dictum, 'Never remove the symptom unless the cause is
understood,' is much emphasized. Its validity is greatly open to
question, since much of medical practice is direct symptom removal, as
only a little thought makes apparent.

"Another dictum generally followed is that the unconscious background of
symptom-complexes must necessarily be made conscious to effect a cure.
Reasonable and thoughtful consideration of the extensive role of the
unconscious in daily living and functioning renders this dictum much
less creditable."

I should like to discuss both of these statements in some detail as they
invariably arise in the mind of the individual seeking help through
hypnosis.

The first thought that comes to mind is that all the religious healings
cited in the Bible involve direct symptom removal. The cures that are
effected by religious devotees traveling to sacred shrines are also in
the realm of direct symptom removal. I have yet to hear a criticism of
this type of treatment directed at religious leaders or condemnation of
the religious shrines. These cures are accepted as evidence of the power
of faith or attributed to the super-natural. In these cases, nothing is
ever done to make the person cured understand the nature of the
unconscious mechanisms which contributed to his problem.

Religious healing cannot be dismissed by merely saying, "It isn't
scientific." A methodology is only scientific when it works. It is of no
value if it doesn't help the individual seeking help. We must face the
fact that not all people can be helped by the same psychological
treatment. We can readily see this in the following extreme example: An
aborigine suffering from a psychological problem certainly wouldn't be a
candidate for psychoanalysis as we know it. He could, no doubt, be
helped much more readily by a witch doctor. It also stands to reason
that the sophisticated Westerner would not be influenced by the
incantations of a tribal medicine man.

Going further, we find there are many schools of psychotherapy and many
approaches to solving man's emotional problems. The cure rate for all of
them, however, is approximately the same. I think we must accept the
fact that there is no _one_ sound, logical, scientific approach. I
believe that so long as the end result is achieved, the methodology was
scientific for that individual's needs. The goal of all therapies is to
help the patient free himself from whatever emotional problems beset
him.

This approach, to some readers, may seem an oversimplification of a very
complex problem, but I think it's time that we had a simple, workable
formula devoid of technical jargon. Too often, complex technical terms
and theories have been glibly used to explain away failures. I believe
we need more and more emphasis on measures to make the patient feel
better rather than spending most of the time trying to find out why he
doesn't feel well. This, of course, is symptom removal again.

I should like to point out an interesting fact pertaining to Biblical
healers. So long as the fame of the healer preceded his arrival in any
country, he was able to heal the sick. However, where his fame as a
healer was either unknown or discredited, he found no faith and
subsequently no cure. The earliest reference to hypnosis is in the
Bible, Genesis ii, 21. "And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall
upon Adam, and he slept ..."

Dr. William Malamud, 86th president of the American Psychiatric
Association, in an address delivered at the annual meeting in 1960,
stated the following in a paper called "Psychiatric Research: Setting
and Motivation":

"During the last few years we have witnessed a growing trend of
overemphasizing the value of 'exact' methodology and uniformity of
standards. This trend, which could be characterized as a 'cult of
objectivity,' has already had an important influence on psychiatric
research. It is true that in its emphasis on critical judgment and valid
criteria, it has helped to curb unrestrained flights of imagination and
sloppy methodology. But the overglorification of objectivity and the
insistence on rigidly single standards of acceptable methods have
resulted in a concentration on certain phases of the science of human
behavior at the expense of other very important ones."

I believe that most individuals have a fairly good understanding of how
they came to have the problem that they have. I have yet to encounter
the person who protests he has no idea why he doesn't function as he
would like to in a certain area. From a practical standpoint, not many
have the time nor money required to delve into the unconscious
background of the problem. The high cost of treatment is a very real
objection and cannot be discounted lightly. People suffering from
emotional problems usually suffer financial reverses as well. Who is to
help these people? There are very few places in the country where they
can receive competent psychiatric help at a reasonable fee. Is there
this type of help in your own community? It is only when the individual
is destitute that the state provides whatever help it can. However, at
this point it's a long hard struggle back to good emotional health.

The National Association for Mental Health and its affiliates issue
about 10 million copies of 200 different pamphlets on various aspects of
mental health. To assess the value of these pamphlets, 47 mental hygiene
experts held a conference at Cornell University. A report on this
outstanding conference has been published. It is called "Mental Health
Education: A Critique." A feature by Ernest Havemann in the August 8,
1960 issue of _Life_ contains a very worthwhile article on this
conference called "Who's Normal? Nobody, But We All Keep On Trying. In
Dissent From 'Mental Health' Approach, Experts Decry Futile Search For
An Unreal Goal." The following paragraph is taken from the _Life_
article:

"What about psychiatry and psychoanalysis? This is a different matter.
Many unhappy and problem-ridden people, though by no means all who have
tried it, have profited from psychotherapy. Indeed, all the mental
health pamphlets, as a postscript to the self-help methods they
advocate, wind up by advising the reader to seek professional care if
his problems are serious enough. But the skeptics at Cornell cited
statistics which to them show that psychiatric treatment is as remote
for the average person as a trip to the moon. Aside from the expense,
which most people would find prohibitive, there simply are not enough
therapists to go around. The U. S. has around 11,000 psychiatrists and
10,000 clinical psychologists--in all, about one for every 8,500
citizens. If everybody with emotional problems decided to see a
psychiatrist, the lines at the doctors' offices would stretch for
miles."

I assume that most readers of this book know that state hospitals are
understaffed and unable to provide proper care for the mentally ill.
Mike Gorman, executive director of the National Mental Health Committee,
has written a crusading report on this very theme called _Every Other
Bed_. In this book he tells us that every other hospital bed in the
United States is occupied by a mental case. Mental illness costs the
country two and a half billion dollars a year besides the more important
untold human suffering that can never be equated in dollars. The book is
a shocking story of how we have let this happen; are still letting it
happen; and of how little, for the most part, we, the general public as
well as the medical and psychological professions, are doing to correct
this deplorable situation.

It is time that we re-examined the dictums that say a symptom can never
be removed unless the cause is understood and the unconscious background
of symptom-complexes must be made conscious and understood before a
cure is effected.

There are many positive thinking groups functioning in the religious
field. Many of these religious groups are in existence primarily because
of the dynamic philosophy or psychology they offer for every day living.
Couple this with a strong faith in God, and you have a combination which
approaches infallibility. Recently we have had a series of best-selling
books which expound this very theme. Does it work? Of course it does
when used properly.

You can be sure that there has been criticism of this religious
psychology. The criticism is that the basic causes of the problem are
never dealt with and the unconscious conflict is not resolved. It's the
same argument over and over again. What about the people helped? They
seem to have made tremendous strides and are leading lives as well
adjusted as anyone else. Once imbued with this spirit or feeling of
well-being, it permeates every phase of their relationships in a
constructive manner. The only reason that there isn't more criticism is
that this type of psychotherapy is incorporated into the religious
tenets of these groups, and criticizing another man's religion makes the
detractor's entire philosophy unacceptable. I am strongly in favor of
these groups because I would prefer having a religion that keeps
pointing out the positive side of life and that "life can be beautiful"
if you put your faith in God and practice positive thinking. It is
certainly better than the cynical philosophy of its detractors or the
grim religions which stress punishment. Think of the guilt feelings
involved in the latter. No one can live up to such a formidable creed.

Of course, if you suggest to positive thinking, religious individuals
that they are using a form of self-hypnosis, they will emphatically
deny and debate the issue. Since we are primarily interested in mental
hygiene and not in winning a debate, it is well to leave the matter as
it stands. The point to keep in mind is that so long as a person feels
that this methodology is the answer to his needs and so long as no one
is being hurt by his belief, I feel he should cling to his conviction.
He should not allow it to be destroyed by those who are thinking in
different semantic terms.

I would like to bring up another common example pertaining to the two
basic concepts that we have been discussing. It is the example of the
many individuals who have taken public speaking courses to overcome
stage fright. In most cases, the person involved hasn't had too much
opportunity to be a public speaker. Because of this, he suddenly feels
he may not say the right thing or forget what he wants to say. This
anxiety can create the very situation or block that he fears. What is
the solution? Certainly not psychoanalysis to find out why he functions
the way he does. You could use this approach, but I don't think it's the
most constructive one. It is like asking, "What am I doing that's
wrong?" instead of "What can I do that's right?" The most constructive
approach is to take a course of instruction to get the actual practice
and experience in the techniques of public speaking.

Before proceeding further, I believe it is necessary to point out that I
am not just being critical of the convictions of other sincere and
dedicated individuals engaged in the field of mental hygiene. It is
always good to re-evaluate our present thinking on any subject, no
matter how sincere or convinced we may be that what we are doing is
correct. At times, we can become so immersed in our convictions that we
cannot take criticism and respond emotionally to ideas or
interpretations that do not coincide with logical thinking.

What, then, is the answer to mental health problems? There is no single
answer. It is a very complex situation. There are many promising drugs
and treatments which, if adequately developed and widely used, could do
a great deal toward promoting good mental health. Fundamentally, the
problem will always be that of trying to understand human behavior and
helping those in distress with an efficacious formula.

What is that formula? I believe hypnosis can contribute in part to the
answer. Needless to say, hypnosis is contraindicated in many emotional
problems because of the very nature of the problem itself. Some
emotional difficulties must first be worked out on a conscious level.
After this, hypnosis can be instrumental in achieving the final goal.

Dr. Frank S. Caprio, a prominent psychiatrist, in his book, _Helping
Yourself with Psychiatry_, states the following: "A whole new world of
self-confidence and positive living is open to every person, young and
old, through hypnosis, self-hypnosis and self-suggestion or
auto-hypnosis."