I'm going to count from one up to twenty. As I do, a light, easy, pleasant feeling moves into your right hand and into your right arm. As I continue counting, that feeling grows stronger and stronger. Soon you'll feel the first slight movement of your fingers, a twitching of the muscles.

Then your hand begins to lift. Your arm begins to lift. It continues moving, lifting, and rising until it comes to rest upon your body.

Now when you feel the movement in your hand and in your arm, don't try to resist. You could resist if you chose to, that is not why you are here. Just let your subconscious mind do its perfect work.

All right, now we are ready to begin.

Number One - The first light, easy sensation moves into the fingertips of your right hand.

Number Two - The feeling is spreading around beneath the fingernails.

Number Three - It is moving up to the first joint of the fingers.

Number Four - Spreading to the large knuckle across the back of the hand.

Number Five - The first slight movements begin to start taking place. Slight movements of the fingers, a twitching of the muscles.

Number Six - The light sensation spreads all across the back of your hand.

Number Seven - Spreading over and into your thumb.

Number Eight - Moving now all through the palm of your hand.

Number Nine - The light sensation spreads up and into your wrist.

Think of your left hand now. You'll see by comparison, your left hand is beginning to feel very, very heavy.

While on Number Ten your right hand grows lighter and lighter with each number I count; just as light as a feather floating in the breeze and even lighter. As light as a gas-filled balloon. Just as a gas-filled balloon will rise and float towards the ceiling, in the same way, by the time I reach the count of twenty, your right hand is moving, lifting, rising and floating.

Number Eleven - The light sensation has moved beyond your wrist now, spreading into your forearm.

Number Twelve - Once again, think of your left hand. Your left hand has grown so heavy, it feels as though it were made of marble or stone.

Number Thirteen, Fourteen - That light sensation is spreading up toward your elbow.

Now on Fifteen - From the fingertips all the way up to the elbow your hand has grown light, light and free. It's beginning to lift. It's moving, lifting, rising and floating.

Number Sixteen - Now your arm is moving and lifting and rising. And as your arm is lifting, you're going deeper and deeper into hypnosis.

Number Seventeen - Your hand continues moving, lifting and rising now until it comes to rest over on your body.

Number Eighteen - Moving, lifting, rising, floating. Right on over now and when your hand comes to rest upon your body, at that time your eyelids lock tightly closed. Your eyelids lock so tightly closed at that point, the more you try to open them the tighter they're locking closed.

Number Nineteen - Your hand is getting ready to come down and rest upon your body.

Number Twenty - Now your hand has come to rest upon your body and at the same time, your eyelids are locked so tightly closed, the more you try to open your eyelids the tighter they are locking closed. That's fine, stop trying and go deeper into trance.
