Ok, just make yourself comfortable now... if you want to close your eyes, that's a good idea, but if you don't, that's fine too... now you can just listen quietly to the sound of my voice... and of course you'll be aware of all those other sounds, too.... sounds inside the building, sounds from outside... but these won't disturb you... In fact they are going to help to relax you, because the only sound you need to think about is the sound of my voice... and while you're listening to the sound of my voice you can just simply allow yourself to be as lazy as you could ever want to be.... Just allow yourself to be as lazy as you could ever want to be...

Good... now, while you're relaxing there in the chair, you can just be aware of your body... aware of your hands where they rest on the arms of the chair... perhaps noticing the angle of your elbows and maybe sensing the weight of your head against the chair back... and, you know, that weight might seem to just gently increase as you allow yourself to relax more and more... just being aware of your ankles and feet now, on the footrest, and wondering if they will start to feel heavy too, as you... relax...

And while you're listening to me, I'd like you to concentrate, in a lazy sort of way, on your breathing... just noticing your breathing... you don't have to breathe in any special way... just become aware of each breath as you breathe quietly... in... and out... and you may notice that each time you breathe out, you relax just a little bit more... and in between there's a delicious moment of stillness when you are neither breathing in nor breathing out... and in that moment of stillness you can relax still further...

And I want you to be aware of your heart beating... perhaps you can feel it in your chest... or maybe in your temples... or maybe as a pulse in your wrist or your neck... and each beat of your heart sends a warm wave of relaxation flowing through your entire body... relaxing you more and more...

And now I want you to scan your body, starting from the top of your head... down through your face... your neck... your shoulders... your arms... your chest... your stomach... your hips... your legs... right down to your feet... and wherever you notice any remaining tension, just breathe into that area and let it go...

And you can continue to relax now, going deeper with each breath... knowing that your subconscious mind is listening to everything I say... and your conscious mind can drift... and dream... and relax...
