First, be sure that you will not be disturbed. Remove your shoes or any apparel that interferes with your physical comfort. Stretch out on your back with your legs separated, feet at least 8 to 10 inches apart, arms extended loosely alongside your body, palms facing downward.

Remain quiet and passive. Fix your eyes at a spot on the ceiling and stare without moving. Take a deep breath, fill your lungs, exhale slowly. Sleep now. Take a second, deeper breath, exhale slowly. Sleep now. Let your eyelids close down and leave them closed until I ask you to open them.

Mentally picture the muscles in the tips of your left foot's toes, following them back into the ball, arch, and heel. Turn all those muscles loose - let them grow limp and lazy like loose rubber bands. As muscles relax, let your mind relax too, drifting to pleasant scenes.

Let relaxation move into the ankle, up to the left knee. Calf muscles grow loose and limp, heavy and relaxed. All tensions fade. Breathe more deeply as in sleep, imagining white mist with each exhale, freeing yourself of tension.

From knee to left hip, thigh muscles turn loose. Let the relaxation wave move into your right foot's toes, back through arch and heel. Into the ankle, up to the right knee. Calf muscles turn loose. From knee to right hip, thigh muscles grow limp.

The wave moves into your stomach, solar plexus, ribs, and chest. Chest muscles grow limp and loose. Relaxation moves into your neck, then down your back from skull to spine. Each muscle releases tension. Broad back muscles relax, spreading across shoulders and small of back.

Into shoulders, down to elbows of both arms. Upper arm muscles relax. From elbows to wrists, forearm muscles grow limp. From wrists to fingertips, each muscle releases tension. Into jaws, mouth muscles relax. Around eyes, muscles are heavy and relaxed. Forehead smooths out, across skull, down temples and ears.

Your entire body is now bathed in pleasant relaxation. Each muscle and nerve is loose, limp, and relaxed. You feel good and completely at ease.
