Look at me now... do not look away.

In a moment I'm going to continue relaxing you further. In a moment I'm going to tell you to extend your hands straight out in front of you. The moment that you do you'll place your palms approximately 12 inches apart.

After that I will tell you to close your eyes. The moment you close your eyes you'll feel as if there are magnets in your palms. Your hands will begin pulling and tugging together. The moment those fingers touch you will allow them to interlock and you'll clasp your hands down tightly.

Extend your hands in front of you now, palms 12 inches apart, fingers spread. You're doing fine, you're doing perfectly.

In a moment I'm going to tell you to close your eyes, the moment you close your eyes it will feel as if there are magnets in your palms. As I count backwards from 3 to 1 the pull gets stronger.

Close your eyes... close your eyelids down tightly... your hands become tugging and pulling... close your eyelids down tightly as if there were magnets in your palms your hands are being drawn together.

Just as a magnet gets stronger the closer it gets, the closer your hands get the stronger the pull, locking down, sealed shut, fingers tightly together the moment they touch.

As I count backwards from 3 to 1 the pull gets stronger... number 3, 3, 2, the next number, number 1 has lock down, sealed shut, clasp down tighter and tighter together.

3, 2, 1, locking down, sealing shut, clasping tighter and tighter together. That's fine, you're doing perfectly.

In a moment I'm going to count backwards from 3 to 1 again. The moment I say the number 1 you will try to unclasp your hands. The moment you try to unclasp your hands you will find that there is nothing you can do, say or think that will allow your hands to separate.

The moment I say the number 1 you'll try to unclasp your hands. The more you try to unclasp your hands the more securely locked down they become.

On number 3 your hands are locking down, sealing shut, clasping tighter and tighter together. On number 2 it feels as if your hands are carved from a single block of wood. On the next number, number 1 you'll try to unclasp your hands, the more you try the more secure they become, number 1.

Try to unclasp your hands, the more you try, the more secure they become, tighter and tighter. That's fine, you're doing perfectly.

Stop trying to unclasp your hands, allow your hands to remain straight out in front of you.

In a moment I'm going to touch your hands, the moment I touch your hands they will easily and readily unlock. In fact, the moment I touch your hands you will relax every muscle in your body and become limp and loose as if you were made from a handful of loose rubber bands.

When I touch your hands relax and let go.
