HYPNOTISM 

Magnetism, Mesmerism, Suggestive 
Therapeutics and Magnetic 
Healing 

Including all that is known in the Art and 
Practice of Hypnotism, Mesmerism, Mental 
and Magnetic Healing. Prepared for the 
self-instruction of beginners as well as for the 
use of advanced students and practitioners. 

BY 

DR. L. W. de LAURENCE 

V 

Author of “The Great Book of Magical Art, Hindu Magic 
and East Indian Occultism/’ “The Sacred Book of Death, 
Hindu Spiritism, Soul Transition and Soul Reincarnation/* 
“The Mystic Text Book of the Hindu Occult Chambers / 9 
“The Magic and Occultism of India, The Wonders of the 
Magic Mirror, Hindu and Egyptian Crystal Gazing, Astral 
Auras and Colors/’ “The Immanence of God, Know Thy¬ 
self/’ “God, the Bible, Truth and Christian Theology.” 

Owning and controlling the publishing rights of the 
only standard and exclusive line of Occult Works 
by The Old Masters and Adepts extant today. 


de LAURENCE, SCOTT & CO., Chicago, Ill., U.S.A. 

1910 













Copyright, 1910 
By 

de LAURENCE, SCOTT & CO. 


SPECIAL NOTICE 

The illustrations, cover design and contents of this Volume 
are protected by copyright, and must not be reproduced or 
copied without written permission from the Publishers. Dis¬ 
regard of this warning will subject the offender to the penalty 
provided by law. 


©Cl. A 2787 82 








z- ?y 


PREFACE. 

In bringing before the public this book on 
Hypnotism, Mesmerism, and Suggestive Thera¬ 
peutics, or the treatment of disease by Hypnot¬ 
ism and Suggestion, I feel that no apology is 
necessary for introducing so important a subject. 

No method of treatment has during the last 
few years attracted so much interest among men 
of science and members of the medical profes¬ 
sion, as has the science of Hypnotism and Sug¬ 
gestion. 

The dangers of Hypnotism and Mesmerism 
have been proven chimerical; and are merely 
imaginary, for in proper hands no undesirable 
medical results can occur through its practice, 
and there is, I believe, hardly one authenticated 
case of its being used for a criminal purpose in 
the countries where it is extensively used, espe¬ 
cially by the medical profession. More than 
this can hardly be said of any system of medical 
7 


8 


PREFACE. 


treatment. The treatment of disease by Hypnot¬ 
ism and Suggestion has been very successful 
where it has been practiced By qualified physi¬ 
cians and intelligent operators whose knowledge 
and experience has taught them the use of 
Hypnotism and Mesmerism in its practical ap¬ 
plication, and many noted physicians unhesi¬ 
tatingly advocate its use as a powerful auxiliary 
in combating many forms of nervous and other 
diseases, not readily reached by other means. 

Hypnotism and Mesmerism, so called, consists 
of a true knowledge of the science of the human 
mind, or soul. 

The mistake the medical fraternity have and 
are making is that they have made an exhaustive 
and scientific study of the physical or material 
part of the human organism, but not of the im¬ 
material part; they analyze and dissect the physi¬ 
cal body, but seem to have no realization or 
knowledge of the non-physical part, or soul of 
man. 

The mind controls the physical body, the body 
being merely a register or an indicator of men¬ 
tal conditions, or the actual condition of the 



PREFACE. 


9 


mind; therefore it is essential that every physi¬ 
cian should have a thorough knowledge of 
pyschology (Hypnotism and Mesmerism) as well 
as physiology, which is a scientific knowledge of 
the mind and its relation to the human body. 

Bodily disease is always mental in origin, men¬ 
tal in action, mental in character, and mental in 
cure, and but for the action of the life or vital 
forces on the diseased organs and functions of 
the body no disease would ever be cured. The 
physician gives medicine to, as he says, assist 
nature, which consists of the life and vital forces, 
or mind, of which he has no true knowledge. 

Hypnotism and Suggestion is the fundamental 
principle of curing and healing every disease. 
No matter what other means may be employed, 
when nature or the life forces within the body 
fails to react on the diseased functions and 
organs, all the medicine and physicians in the 
universe cannot effect a cure, or prevent a death. 

Observing people do not always have time to 
wander through a perplexing multitude of books 
in a fruitless attempt to gain a little knowledge 
buried therein. The instructions and methods 



IO 


PREFACE. 


given here are the latest and most complete 
known for inducing the Mesmeric and Hypnotic 
sleep. Nothing problematical is given; but facts 
gained from personal experience by the author 
in the successful practice of Hypnotism, Mes¬ 
merism, Suggestive Therapeutics, and Magnetic 
Healing, for many years. 

Many conceited and narrow-minded individ¬ 
uals look upon Hypnotism as a fraud. 

<r Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit, 
There is more hope of a foof than of him.” 

(Prov. 26:12.) 

The fact that complete anaethsia can be pro¬ 
duced in any part of the body, provides the ex¬ 
perimenter with a ready means of demonstrating 
that there is no simulation on the part of the 
subject. 

There are two things for this class of people 
to learn yet: First, that a statement that they 
do not believe in Hypnotism or Magnetism 
brands them as being ignorant and destitute of 
a knowledge of Psychology, 

And that to ridicule what you do not under¬ 
stand is what really wise men never do. 



PREFACE. 


II 


The author does not wish to be understood as 
attacking the teaching of materia medica, or 
antagonizing the medical profession, but as sug¬ 
gesting a way by which they may be rendered 
more effectual and potent by a study and better 
understanding of Psycho-Therapeutics. 

This book will be of great value and interest 
to the physician, clergyman, lawyer, teacher, 
merchant, and the private citizen of either sex, 
and will, I trust, be a useful hand-book for prac¬ 
titioners and those who have not the time to 
devote to more elaborate and systematic works. 

The Author. 






‘ Hypnotism embodies and unfolds the law and secret 
power , by which and through which all personal m~ 
fluence is and ever shall be exerted." 

De Laurence. 

“All that we are or ever will be is the result of 
what has been thought." 


De Laurence. 





CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Preface.7 

The Science of Hypnotism.17 

Instructions for Testing Subjects . . .23 

Inducing Hypnotic Sleep.27 

Fascination.33 

Celebrated Table Method.35 

For Stage Purposes.37 

The Lock Method.41 

The Famous Nancy Method.43 

Post-Hypnotic Suggestions . . . . 45 

Anaesthesia—H ow Produced.49 

Cataleptic or Rigid State .... 53 

Lethargic or Independent State . . . .57 

Clairvoyant or Second Sight .... 59 

Hypnosis Self-Induced.65 

To Hypnotize by Telegraph, Telephone or Mail 73 
People Hypnotized Against Their Will . . 77 

Instantly Hypnotised . . . , . .81 

Hindoo Sleep—H ow Induced .... 83 

Symptoms of Hypnosis.89 

Different Stages of Hypnosis .... 91 

15 






16 CONTENTS. 

How to Make a Subject . 

Curing Disease by Hypnotism 

Personal Magnetism. 

Hypnotism and Crime. 

Hypnotism and Insanity. 

Hypnotizing Animals. 

Hypnotizing by a Rotating Mirror 
Mind and Body, or The Science of Being 
Telepathy, Mind Reading and Spiritualism . 

Magnetic Healing. 

The Phenomena of Hypnosis . 

The Psychology of Hypnosis 
Treatment by Hypnotism and Suggas^^v 


PAGK 

• 93 
95 

• 97 

IOI 

. 107 
hi 

• ii5 
ii7 

. 125 
143 

• 153 
161 

. 169 



HYPNOTISM. 


CHAPTER I. 

THE SCIENCE OF HYPNOTISM. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Hypnotism and Mesmerism, its History.—Brief Sketch 
of the Life of Friedrich Anton Mesmer—Discov¬ 
ery of Animal Magnetism.—Mesmer’s Passes.— 
Hypnotism a Psychological not a Physiological Con¬ 
dition—Definition of Hypnotism, Mesmerism, and 
Animal, or Personal, Magnetism.—Terms Used. 

The science of Hypnotism and Mesmerism has 
been evolved from such a labyrinth of idle super¬ 
stition and wild speculation that even those 
keenly interested in the development of human 
knowledge have held aloof from a subject which 
apparently presents so entangled a maze of in¬ 
soluble complications. 

In the long course of its history it has been 
the frequent prey of the unscientific investigator, 
and, indeed almost everybody ignorant of its 
true principle, has a theory or idea as to how 
17 




18 


HYPNOTISM. 


the phenomena is produced. The history of 
Hypnotism begins almost like a fable. Methods 
were in use amongst the Egyptians, the Greeks, 
and the Romans, which present a striking simi¬ 
larity to the means adopted by modern Hypnot¬ 
ists. 

In the British museum there is a bas-relief 
taken from a tomb in Thebes. The “Subject,” 
as he would be termed in modern phraseology, 
is sitting down, and a short distance from him 
a man is standing with hand uplifted and evi¬ 
dently about to make a pass over the sub¬ 
ject. The Goddess Isis, on the zodiac of her 
temple, at Denderah, is represented as making 
the same “Passes” the earliest Greek physicians 
were in the habit of using, processes having a 
strong resemblance to those used by every Hyp¬ 
notist. 

The first traces of any system appeared about 
the end of the middle ages, and then it was 
attempted to demonstrate that the human will 
was capable of producing the phenomena. 

It then remained for Mesmer to shed new 
light upon the question, and in 1775 he discov¬ 
ered that the phenomena could be produced in 
various ways, and then it was called Mesmerism, 
but was afterwards changed to Hypnotism, in 
1841, by Dr. Braid of England, who produced 




INHALING 260 AMMONIA. 

The sense of smell being Desensitized fey Suggestion. 




















THE SCIENCE OP HYPNOTISM. 




the phenomena by a different method, and called 
the condition produced Hypnosis (a Greek word 
meaning sleep) and the art of producing it Hyp¬ 
notism. 

To those, however, who would have a clear 
knowledge of what Hypnotism is and what it is 
not, a study of its history is not essential. And 
it is quite an easy matter to teach any one how to 
hypnotize. Any person of ordinary intelligence 
can be taught to become a successful operator 
by simply following the methods herein de¬ 
scribed, which, if strictly obeyed, will enable 
any one to succeed. 

In order to make plain to the student certain 
phrases and terms which I shall use in this work, 
it will be necessary to call attention to a 
brief sketch of the history of Hypnotism and 
Mesmerism. 

Mesmerism takes its name from Friedrich 
Anton Mesmer, who was born in a village called 
Stein, on the banks of the Rhine, in May, 1734, 
and was educated and attained his degree of Dr. 
at Vienna, where he studied under Professor 
Van Switen and Professor Haen. 

In 1775 he startled the world by reports of 
his discovery of what is now known as Personal 
or Animal Magnetism. He operated by a sys¬ 
tem of passes demonstrating the existence of 


HYPNOTISM. 


vo 

personal magnetism, and that magnetism could 
be directed by the will of the operator to the 
subject, and that this influence was capable when 
properly and intelligently directed of producing 
the phenomena known now as Mesmerism, or 
the mesmeric sleep. 

Later, in 1841, Dr. Braid of England, the fa¬ 
mous Manchester physician, produced the phe¬ 
nomena by an entirely different method. His 
method of operating consisted of fixation of 
gaze, and he and many others supposed the 
cause and condition was a purely physiological 
one. 

This view, as is known by all enlightened and 
learned men in Psychology, is a mistaken one. 
As all Hypnotic, Mesmeric and abnormal states 
are caused and brought about by actual 
psychical condition, whether self-induced or 
otherwise. The phenomena known as Hypnosis 
is not a physiological condition, and all views to 
this effect are erroneous. 

Very few are aware of the difference between 
Hypnotism and Mesmerism, and many confound 
the two as meaning the same thing. It is essen¬ 
tial for the student to know that all conditions 
induced by the subject fixing his gaze on an 
object, either held in the hand of the operator 
or not is an hypnotic state, and that 



THE SCIENCE OF HYPNOTISM. 


21 


all conditions induced by passes or any 
other personal application or direction of the 
will by the operator is a mesmeric state. 
Practically speaking, the condition or state in¬ 
duced and the phenomena produced by either 
means is the same, both being a purely psychical 
condition, and consists of an entire suspension of 
the physical sense organs, whether brought 
about by mesmeric passes, concentration of gaze, 
fascination, or any other means, and while in this 
condition the subject is under the control of the 
operator and susceptible to Suggestion. 

The study of Hypnotism from a psychological 
point is absolutely essential to success, and the 
importance of a careful observation of the phe¬ 
nomena of Hypnotism and its relation to the 
psychic mind can hardly be exaggerated. And 
for the student of Hypnotism or Psychology 
there is a wide field of work where the oppor¬ 
tunities for definite experimental work are 
many. This view could have been more em¬ 
ployed than it* has been up to the present time, 
as too many writers on Psychology, appear to 
think that a casual acquaintance with the subject 
is all that is necessary as a basis of opinion. 
Hypnotism or its results are based upon natural 
law. It is, “The science of the age,” and the 
most interesting of all the sciences. And any 



22 


HYPNOTISM. 


one who studies the human mind from a 
psychological point of view and learns its influ¬ 
ence over the human body, has a wonderful ad¬ 
vantage. 

Strictly speaking, the difference between Hyp¬ 
notism and Mesmerism, or the Mesmeric or 
Hypnotic sleep, is that sleep induced by passes 
as used by Mesmer is termed the Mesmeric or 
Magnetic sleep, and sleep induced by objective 
gaze, where the subject concentrates his mind 
and sight upon some certain object until Hyp¬ 
nosis is induced is termed the Hypnotic sleep. 
To avoid confusion, however, I will dispense 
with these several different terms for the phe¬ 
nomena whether Hypnotic, Mesmeric or Mag¬ 
netic, is commonly known as Hypnotism. I will 
use this term especially in the body part of the 
instructions contained in this book as specifying 
these different phenomena. And the different 
conditions when induced as an Hypnosis or 
Hypnotic state. 





CHAPTER II. 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR TESTING SUBJECTS. 

Who is Susceptible to Hypnosis.—Who Make Good Sub¬ 
jects.—Concentration Necessary—Favorite Methods. 
Hand and Eye Test.—Breaking the Influence.— 
Drawing Test—Difficult Subjects.—Vain Struggle. 

As some persons are more quickly influenced 
than others, being more susceptible to hypnotic 
influence, you can by the following methods 
easily ascertain what ones will make good sub¬ 
jects and whether you will be able to impress 
them or not. 

First have the subject you are going to test 
stand up in the center of the room, place both 
arms down by his side with his heels touching, 
and ask him to let, as far as possible, his muscles 
relax and to stand perfectly still. 

Now take a position in front of the subject and 
tell him you are going to draw him forward, 
but not to be afraid of falling as you will stop 
him before he reaches the floor. Now concen¬ 
trate your gaze intently and directly on the 
pupil of his left eye, and hold the thought and 
intention firmly in your mind that you are going 
23 




24 


HYPNOTISM. 


to draw him over toward you, and while looking 
at him do not let any other thought or idea enter 
your mind, or nothing divert your attention 
from the task you have before you. Stand quite 
close to the subject, raise both of your open 
hands to the level of his eyes opposite either 
side of his head, fingers pointing backward, con¬ 
centrate .your eyes on his, as directed above, and 
draw your hands steadily and firmly forward all 
the while intently willing him forward. 

Repeat this method if you do not . succeed the 
first time in influencing him, being sure to get 
the proper concentration. 

If the subject is susceptible to Hypnosis he 
will feel an influence drawing him forward off 
from his balance that he cannot resist. You can 
now take the same position at his back and oper¬ 
ate on his head at the base of the brain in the 
same manner that you did in front of him, draw¬ 
ing him backward off from his balance and catch¬ 
ing him with your hands, at the same time say¬ 
ing, “All right; all right.” 

Another favorite method for testing a subject 
is to have the person you are going to operate on 
sit down in a chair and clasp his hands tightly 
together by crossing the fingers, with arms ex¬ 
tended straight out from the shoulder. 

Take a position in front of him and clasp his 




INSTRUCTIONS FOR TESTING SUBJECTS. 25 

hands between the thumb and second finger of 
your left hand, and with your right hand make 
passes down over his arms, touching them light¬ 
ly from the shoulders to the hands. Keeping 
your gaze riveted on his left eye and give the 
following suggestions in a firm voice and de¬ 
cided manner, say to him your hands are getting 
tighter together all the time. Your hands are 
getting tighter, tighter, all the time. Now when 
you try to get your hands apart you cannot do 
it; you will find the more you try the tighter 
your hands will stick. Now step back, releasing 
his hands, and he will find it a physical impossi¬ 
bility to get his hands apart. And when he is 
satisfied you have got His hands locked tightly 
together, release him from the influence by clap¬ 
ping your hands together or snapping your fin¬ 
gers and at the same time saying in a loud voice, 
“All right. Now you can take your hands 
apart; your hands are all right now.” 

The next is the eye test, and is a good one 
when properly made. 

Seat the subject as before, with both feet flat 
upon the floor, tell him you are going to fix his 
eyes so he cannot get them open no matter how 
hard he tries. Now have him close his eyes and 
place his right hand palm downward on his right 
knee, grasp his open left hand in your left and 


26 


HYPNOTISM. 




with the fingers of your right hand make light 
passes or strokes over his eyes and forehead and 
give suggestions as follows: 

“Now when you try to open your eyes you 
will find the lids are stuck so tightly together 
you cannot get them apart, and the more you 
try to get them apart the tighter they will stick, 
no matter how hard you try you cannot open 
your eyes.” Now let him try but at the same 
time keep his left hand in yours and let him 
struggle in the vain effort to open his eyes. Tell 
him to stand up and see if he can open them, 
and when you wish to release him do so by clap¬ 
ping your hands or snapping your fingers and 
saying, “All right now.” 

If a subject is influenced by any of the above 
tests, he can safely be regarded as a good sub¬ 
ject for demonstrations in Hypnotism, but if he 
has not been in the least influenced or affected 
by any of the tests you may regard him as a 
difficult subject, and one that will take time and 
patience to influence, and cannot be used right 
away. 





CHAPTER III. 


FOR INDUCING HYPNOTIC SLEEP. 

METHOD ONE. 

Disturbing Influence.—Undue Nervousness.—Precau¬ 
tions Necessary.—Precautions Dispensable—^Con¬ 
stant Suggestions.—Suggested Catalepsy.—Revers¬ 
ing Passes.—Somnambulism. —Changed Personality. 
—Variety of Delusions. 

“Man has the faculty of exercising over his 
fellow beings a salutary influence by concentrat¬ 
ing his mind and will upon what he desires them 
to do.”—DeLaurence. 

To induce Hypnotic sleep proceed as follows: 
Have the subject sit in a comfortable chair with 
his back to the light, assuming an easy natural 
position for sleep, placing his feet upon the floor, 
and the open palms of his hands upon each 
knee; never have the hands or legs crossed when 
inducing Hypnosis. Now take a position on his 
right side, and state to him that you are going 
to put him into a sound comfortable sleep. Tell 
him to let every muscle in his body become per¬ 
fectly relaxed, and just think to himself that he 
is getting so sleepy that he cannot keep his eyes 
27 


28 


HYPNOTISM. 


open. Then, secure the subject’s attention; and 
hold it. Let him see by your behavior and easy, 
confident manner that you are competent and 
master of the situation; assert that you can hyp¬ 
notize him, and you will be successful. Do not 
let the thought of failure enter your mind for 
one moment, and do not be afraid to make posi¬ 
tive assertions, but state, “You can, and will, 
Hypnotize him.” 

Now concentrate your gaze and mind on the 
pupil of his left eye and tell him not to let his 
eyes waver or try to avoid your eyes, but to look 
at you all the time—until his eyes get so sleepy 
he cannot keep them open. 

Now all the while constantly willing him to 
sleep give the following suggestions by saying, 
“You will begin to feel a sleepy, drowsy sensa¬ 
tion coming all over your body; you will feel a 
sleepy influence coming all over your head and 
eyes; you are getting sleepy, sleepy, sleepy, so 
sleepy and drowsy you will not be able to keep 
your eyes open; your eyelids are getting so 
heavy you cannot keep them up. You are going 
sound asleep, sleep, sleep, so sleepy and drowsy; 
you’re getting so sleepy and drowsy you cannot 
keep your eyes open any longer.” Repeat the 
above suggestions over and over until you notice 
the subject’s eyes getting so sleepy and drowsy 




FOR INDUCING HYPNOTIC SLEEP. 29 

that he cannot keep them open. Then say, 
“Sound asleep.” “Dead asleep.” “Down deep 
asleep.” “Go deep.” “Down deep.” And when 
his eyes are closed make light passes over the 
forehead and eyes, touching them very lightly, 
but keep on giving the suggestions of deep sleep. 
Say to him, “Every breath you draw puts you 
down deeper asleep, every breath you draw is a 
sleepy and drowsy one; every part of your body 
is sound asleep, dead asleep, dead asleep.” 

If the subject’s eyes do not close entirely, al¬ 
though he looks and feels sleepy, press down the 
eye lids with the tips of your fingers and he will 
be sound asleep. 

Have everybody present keep perfectly quiet. 
The surroundings must be free from any disturb¬ 
ing influences and noises like the quiet opening 
or shutting of a door, or the whispering of per¬ 
sons inside the room. All these serve to distract 
the attention of the subject at a critical time. 
The subject should be asked to keep his mind a 
blank as far as possible, and not trouble his mind 
over anything. Every thing should be done to 
have the subject calm and free from undue ner¬ 
vousness. 

It must not be assumed that these detailed 
observances are in all cases necessary, for it 
greatly depends upon the susceptibility of the 



3° 


HYPNOTISM. 


subject, but if you expect to gain an average of 
anything over 80 per cent it will only be by at¬ 
tention to these details. The first Hypnosis is 
always the most difficult to induce, and after the 
subject has been hypnotized a few times you can 
generally dispense with a great many of these 
precautions. 

You now have the subject sound asleep, and 
it will be well for you, as a beginner, especially 
if you have a new subject, constantly to make 
suggestions, as follows: You say, “Now you 
are fast asleep; nothing will disturb you or wake 
you. You cannot wake up until I count three 
and wake you up. You can open your eyes, but 
you will stay asleep. Nothing will wake you.” 

You can now induce what is termed 

SUGGESTED CATALEPSY. 

In the following manner: Place the arm straight 
out from the body; make passes from the shoul¬ 
der to fingers, and say: “Now, your arm is stiff 
and rigid; you have no feeling in any part of 
your arm, and it will remain in the position I 
have placed it; you cannot take it down, no mat¬ 
ter how hard you try.” 

The arm will remain in this position, and if 
you tell him that no one can take it down or 


FOR INDUCING HYPNOTIC SLEEP. 31 


bend it you will find it true that no one can. 
Always begin operation in this way, placing both 
arms in the upright position. When you are 
ready to take them down, make strokes from 
hand to shoulder, reversing them, and say: 
“Now you can take them down. And you will 
do everything I tell you; you will have to do so. 
No one can wake you except myself. ,, 

You can now proceed to induce somnambul¬ 
ism or trance condition, thereby changing the 
personality of the subject. Tell him that he will 
open his eyes without waking up, and when he 
opens his eyes he will behold the most beauti¬ 
ful flowers he ever saw, that there is a bed of 
them right in front of him, and tell him to pick 
some of them for you. And if he hesitates, in¬ 
sist. Tell him to get some for you, and have 
him give some one present an imaginary bou¬ 
quet, or tell him a lot of bees are stinging him, 
and his frantic efforts to drive them off will be 
amusing; or give him a stick, for a pole, and 
have him catch some fish from an imaginary 
stream; or tell him he is a great politician, and 
have him make a speech to an imaginary audi¬ 
ence; give him a lemon and tell him it is an 
orange or an apple and he will eat it with pleas¬ 
ure ; give him suggestions that he is a little boy, 
and he will act out the part. Any delusion can 


32 


HYPNOTISM. 


be induced, and the variety depends on the im¬ 
agination and descriptive powers of the operator. 

You can make him forget his name, fix him 
so he cannot utter a word or open his mouth or 
make his limbs stiff so he cannot walk, and he 
will find it impossible to take a step or remove 
his feet from the floor until you tell him he can 
do so, or be released by the proper suggestion. 



CHAPTER IV. 

FASCINATION. 

METHOD TWO. 

Magnetic Personality Used.—Vacant Stars.—Involute 
tary Hypnosis. 

This method, introducing as it does a large 
amount of the personal element or personal mag¬ 
netism of the operator, is a favorite one with 
those who prefer to use the mesmeric passes 
and methods. 

Seat the subject in a comfortable position on 
one side of the room, the operator taking a po¬ 
sition about twelve or fifteen feet away. Have 
the subject gaze steadily into the operator's eyes, 
who must all the while keep his gaze firmly fixed 
on those of the subject until the eyes of the sub¬ 
ject take on a vacant and trancelike stare. When 
this takes place you have him under perfect con¬ 
trol and can induce sleep by sharp and decided 
suggestions to that effect, and proceed to induce 
somnambulism or trance condition as in Method 
One. This method is somewhat risky, since, if 
the subject be difficult or refractory, the operator 
himself may involuntarily become hypnotized. 

33 



34 


HYPNOTISM. 


As I have knowledge of a number of instances 
where in using this method operators have 
found themselves developing decided symptoms 
of Hypnosis, but this can be avoided by deter¬ 
mination on the operator's part. 



CHAPTER V. 

CELEBRATED TABLE METHOD. 

METHOD THREE. 

frantic Efforts.—Perfect Concentration.—Roars of 
Laughter. 

The Table Method, as this one is sometimes 
called, is very desirable, as it can be used at pri¬ 
vate parties and social gatherings, especially 
when operating upon young ladies, or giving 
demonstrations in Hypnotism. 

Have the subject sit in a chair on the opposite 
side of a table with hands clasped and fingers 
locked, arms resting straight out upon the table, 
the operator also sitting in a chair on the oppo¬ 
site side of the table gazing intently and steadily 
into the eyes of the subject for about two min¬ 
utes or more, then in a low decided tone tell 
the subject that when he tries to raise his arms 
from the table he cannot do it, and when you 
have made him powerless to lift his arms tell 
him he cannot get up from the chair, that he is 
stuck fast and the harder he tries the tighter he 
35 


36 


HYPNOTISM. 


will stick, and his frantic efforts to do so will 
provoke a roar of laughter. The suggestions 
must be made decidedly and the concentration 
profess good results. 




CHAPTER VI. 

FOR STAGE PURPOSES. 

METHOD FOUR. 

Hypnotic Show.—Individual Application.—Fast and 
Fierce —Demonstrations Positive. —Boisterousness. 

The following method will be found the proper 
one for giving a Hypnotic show. After getting 
eight or ten persons to come upon the stage to 
be hypnotized seat them in a half circle, feet flat 
upon the floor, with palms of their hands rest¬ 
ing on either knee, tell them all to close their 
eyes and sit perfectly quiet and think of nothing 
but sleep. 

Then in a loud deep voice suggest, “Sleep, 
sleep, you are going down deep asleep, down 
deep, go deep, deep, down deep.” Passing from 
one end of the circle to the other lightly touch¬ 
ing the eyes of each individual, tell them to take 
long deep breaths and they “will go deep asleep, 
dead asleep.” 

Then in a loud determined voice tell them 
when they try to open their eyes or wake up 
they cannot do it. If some open their eyes, tell 
them to again close their eyes and operate on 
37 



38 


HYPNOTISM. 


them individually, giving them a strong appli¬ 
cation, and if you cannot fasten their eyes in this 
manner, ask them politely to leave the stage, as 
you have not the time to devote to them and can 
only use those who can be readily influenced. 
Then proceed and give a show, putting on the 
cataleptic state, hat pin and needle tests, cake 
walk, boxing match, etc. 

A Hypnotic show to be a success must not be 
allowed to drag, but must be fast and fierce, with 
positive demonstrations, warm enough to melt 
scepticism, and drive away a frost. Get the peo¬ 
ple with you by being firm and gentlemanly but 
not boisterous. 

Make a speech something like the following: 

“Ladies and gentlemen, I desire to state, that 
Hypnotism is and can be used in many ways, 
and it is especially good where surgical opera¬ 
tions are to be performed. Hypnotism is also 
useful in the treatment of nervous and functional 
disorders, such as rheumatism, neuralgia, to¬ 
bacco and morphine habits. 

“I wish also to state that I do not want any¬ 
body to come upon the stage to show that they 
cannot be hypnotized, as it is no honor. The 
same may be said of an idiot. Unsusceptibility 
to hypnotic influence is not a sign of intelli¬ 
gence, however much your ignorance of the 



FOR STAGE PURPOSES. 


39 


matter may prompt you to think so, and unless 
you mean to conduct yourself in a gentlemanly, 
courteous manner, and not affect Hypnotism 
when you are not hypnotized, I do not want 
you to come upon the stage, as I have no use fox 
the pretender or professional fakir.” 




CHAPTER VII. 

THE LOCK METHOD. 

METHOD FIVE. 

Mysterious.—Never Before Given Before the Public.— 
Bolted Doors.—Painful Positions.—Psychic Forces. 
—Mind Upon Matter. 

The most marvelous and mysterious of all 
psychic and spiritualistic phenomena is the won¬ 
derful Lock Method, known to but a very few 
operators, and I can truthfully state that it has 
never before been given to the public. The per¬ 
son who possesses this knowledge can while out¬ 
side of a room or locked in a room in another 
part of the house or building, or outside of the 
house entirely, with all doors bolted and locked, 
hypnotize a number of persons inside of the room 
or building in the following manner: 

Have two or three subjects sit beside each 
other upon chairs, have them clasp their hands 
and then say, “All ready now, everybody.” Then 
the operator should leave the room, having some 
person lock the door. He can go to another 
room or out of the building, if desired, taking a 
position in a quiet place and mentally suggest- 
41 


4* 


HYPNOTISM. 


ing to himself that the subjects cannot get their 
hands apart. If necessary the operator can be 
locked in another room, and in about five or 
seven minutes he can return and it will be found 
that the subjects’ hands are tightly fastened to¬ 
gether. Another way is fo stand the subjects in 
the middle of the room with arms outstretched, 
the operator proceeding as before, but should 
not remain away this time over three or five 
minutes as this is a very painful and tiring posi¬ 
tion for the arms to be in any length of time. 
The operator can by this method demonstrate 
that for psychic forces or personal magnetism 
there exists no space, and that a person can be 
influenced at a distance as well as in the same 
room providing the proper conditions are 
brought about. There being an immediate ac¬ 
tion of psychic forces upon psychic forces, and 
not, as a common view takes for granted of 
mind upon matter. 


CHAPTER VIII. 

THE FAMOUS NANCY METHOD. 

METHOD SIX. 

Monotonous Tones.—Final Hypnosis.—Fixation of Gaze. 

—Convergent Strabismus. 

The method in common use at the University 
of Nancy, France, is as follows: The subject is 
comfortably seated in an easy chair, with his 
back to the light, and the operator stands by his 
side, holding up two fingers of his right hand 
about twelve inches from the subject’s eyes. The 
subject is told to look intently at these two 
fingers, and, as far as possible, to keep his mind 
a blank, as soon as the eyes begin to show symp¬ 
toms of weariness the Hypnotist begins in a low 
monotonous tone of voice to suggest sleep as in 
Method One. 

Sometimes the operator without waiting for 
these symptoms to appear will start at once^ tell¬ 
ing the subject, “You are beginning to feel 
drowsy; your eyelids are quivering; your eyes 
are getting tired; sleep is coming,” until gradu¬ 
ally the condition of the subject diverges more 
and more from the normal. The final Hypnosis 
43 


44 


HYPNOTISM. 


generally comes suddenly. The eyes close quick¬ 
ly, deep breathing takes place, and subject is 
sound asleep. You can now proceed to induce 
Suggested Catalepsy and Somnambulism or 
Trance condition, as given in Method One. 
Hypnosis is induced by this method by fixation 
of gaze, combined with suggestion. The strained 
position of the eyes, and the slight convergent 
strabismus which results, produces a tired con¬ 
dition of the brain, and causes sleep, four or five 
minutes generally sufficing to develop complete 
Hypnosis. (This being a psychological explana¬ 
tion for those who wish it.) The exact object 
held before the subject’s eyes matters little. It 
may be the operator’s fingers, or a disc held be¬ 
fore the subject about a foot from the eyes, 
placed in such a position that when looking at 
it the gaze will be strained upward, it being ab¬ 
solutely necessary that the subject concentrate 
his mind and whole attention as well as his eyes 
on the object, and think only of watching the 
object held in the operator’s hand. 



CHAPTER IX. 

POST-HYPNOTIC SUGGESTIONS. 

Interesting Phenomena—Designated Place, Time or 
Date.—No Knowledge or Realization.—Cigarette 
Fiends.—Drunkards.—Strange Hypnotic Power.— 
Altered Personality.—Indelibly Impressed.—Good 
Results. 

In all deep stages of Hypnosis, the character¬ 
istic phenomena of post-hypnotic suggestions 
may be obtained. These phenomena are very 
interesting, and can be used to good advantage 
in curing disease and evil habits, and consists 
of giving a suggestion while the subject is in 
the Hypnotic sleep, to be carried out after he 
has again been brought back to his normal con¬ 
dition. 

It is not necessary to its success that these 
suggestions should take effect immediately. 
Post-hypnotic suggestions can be given to take 
effect at any designated place, hour, or date, or 
any set future time. As an illustration, give a 
subject a post-hypnotic suggestion while he is 
asleep, to the effect that to-morrow at one p, m. 
he will come to your house or will go to sleep 
45 




46 


HYPNOTISM. 


at any hour stated, and he will most certainly 
do so. 

Any suggestion or command given during 
Hypnosis will take effect post-hypnotically, if 
properly made when the subject is in deep Hyp¬ 
nosis or sound asleep and under the control of 
the operator, or susceptible to suggestion. 

It is possible to obtain the fulfillment of post¬ 
hypnotic suggestion at an extremely distant date. 
Suggest to a subject while he is sound asleep 
that in eight weeks he will mail you a letter 
with a blank piece of note paper inside, and dur¬ 
ing the intervening period you may yourself for¬ 
get the occurrence, but, in exactly eight weeks, 
he will carry out the suggestions. Suggestions 
of this nature are always carried out, especially 
when the suggestion is to take effect on some 
certain day or date named. Suggest to a sub¬ 
ject that in ninety days from a given date he will 
come to your house with his coat on inside out, 
and he will most certainly do so. 

One strange part of these phenomena is that 
when awakened after post-hypnotic suggestions 
have been given the subject has no knowledge 
or recollection that he has been given any sug¬ 
gestions, and thinks that his acts are due to the 
natural course of events. 

To set one person against another and cause 


POST-HYPNOTIC SUGGESTIONS. 47 


him to hate the other, induce deep Hypnosis in 
the regular way and suggest to him that Mr. B. 
has done him a great wrong or injury, and that 
when you wake him he will hate and despise Mr. 
B. When he wakes up he will have no knowl¬ 
edge of what you have done with him or how 
you have changed his condition of mind toward 
Mr. B., but he will have no friendship for Mr. 
B., that can be depended upon. Take a drunkard 
or a cigarette fiend and give him suggestions 
that when you wake him up the sight or smell 
of whiskey or cigarettes will make him deathly 
sick and that if he tries to take a drink of liquor 
or smoke a cigarette he will get so sick that 
he can not stand up, then awaken him and have 
someone offer him a drink or a cigarette and he 
will refuse, giving as the only reason that the 
sight of them makes him sick. The writer has 
cured some of the worst cigarette fiends by this 
method when nothing else would cure or affect 
them. The Hypnotist can by this method and 
strange Hypnotic power change the personality 
of an individual, and mold his character to suit 
his wishes, but he should hesitate in employing 
it for purposes otherwise than beneficial, as he 
is liable to place the subject in a very unhappy 
position, and of course be responsible for evil 
results. 


48 


HYPNOTISM. 


As stated above, it is absolutely necessary 
when giving Post-Hypnotic suggestions that the 
subject should be sound asleep and deeply under 
the Hypnotic influence. 

Then take a position beside the subject and 
while giving the suggestions make passes over 
the subject’s forehead and give suggestions in a 
firm and decided manner. Repeat them over sev¬ 
eral times so that they will become indelibly im¬ 
pressed upon the sleeper’s mind, and, when 
through giving the suggestions, to have good 
results. Wake the subject up instantly, but give 
suggestions before doing so, that he will have 
no memory or recollection of your having given 
them after you have awakened him. 


CHAPTER X. 

ANAESTHESIA, HOW PRODUCED. 

Suspended Animation.—Complete Anaesthesia.—Posi¬ 
tive Suggestions.—Hat and Needle Tests.—Public 
Demonstrations.—Singing with Sewed Tongues.— 
Minute Inspection Allowed. 

In all deep stages of Hypnosis anaesthesia can 
be produced in any part of the human body f 
animation being entirely suspended and all sense 
of feeling or pain removed from that particular 
part of the body. 

To produce complete anaesthesia for hat pin 
tests or surgical operations, decided suggestions 
must be given while the subject is in deep Hyp¬ 
nosis, that he has no sense of feeling whatever 
in that particular part on which you wish to 
operate upon. 

The proper way to put a hat pin through the 
cheek is first to immerse the pin in some good 
antiseptic solution. Then give positive sugges¬ 
tions that he has no feeling in his cheek, that 
that part of his face is completely insensible to 
49 



5 ° 


HYPNOTISM, 


pain, and that he will not feel the least pain 
when you put the pin through. Then take any 
ordinary steel hat pin and force it through his 
cheek, and he will not feel any pain, nor will 
blood flow when it is withdrawn. 

If you wish to put a needle or hat pin through 
the tongue of a subject have him extend his 
tongue as far as possible, then take hold of it 
with a handkerchief and give decided suggestions 
that he has no feeling whatever in his tongue, 
and that he cannot feel any pain in his tongue. 

While giving public demonstrations on the 
stage the author has often sewed three or four 
subjects’ tongues together and while thus fast¬ 
ened had them all sing or dance. They of course 
having no knowledge of the sewing process, for 
the author would sew one subject’s tongue to his 
ear, and put two or three hat pins through the 
tongue or cheek of another subject, and let them 
pass through the audience for minute inspec¬ 
tion. Where this was done, using citizens who 
had come upon the stage so that all doubt and 
idea of fraud or simulation would quickly vanish. 

It must be understood, however, that the sub¬ 
ject for these tests must be down in a very deep 
stage of Hypnosis and the suggestions must be 
given in a decided and convincing manner, that 
he has no feeling whatever in his tongue or 



SUGGESTED ANAESTHESIA. 

Tongue sewed to the Ear. 



















ANAESTHESIA, HOW PRODUCED. 


5i 


cheek. When this is done, you need have no 
fear of hurting the subject, for he will not feel 
the least pain, providing you have done your 
part properly. 





CHAPTER XI. 

CATALEPTIC OR RIGID STATE. 

Marvelous Demonstrations.—Wonderful Weight Sus¬ 
tained.—Stone Breaking Tests.—Caution Necessary. 

The author has during his long experience as 
an operator given some marvelous tests of the 
Cataleptic or Rigid state. 

While giving private demonstrations for the 
benefit of some physicians and other professional 
men in a certain Ohio town, a young lady quite 
tall was used as a subject, for the Cataleptic test, 
her weight being but 120 pounds, as I afterwards 
learned. She was put in the Cataleptic state, 
her body becoming rigid as a bar of iron. While 
in this condition, her head was placed upon the 
back of a high dining-room chair, and her feet 
upon another. In this position her body sus¬ 
tained without apparent effort four hundred and 
five pounds, the combined weight of three per¬ 
sons who stood upon her body while in this 
position. No ill effects resulted, the young lady 
stating that she had no knowledge or recollec¬ 
tion, after being brought out of the condition, 
53 



54 


HYPNOTISM. 


of what had been done with her while Hypno¬ 
tized. 

The stone-breaking tests with which nearly all 
are familiar, is where a stone weighing between 
five and six hundred pounds, is broken with a 
sledge-hammer, while lying on the breast of a 
young man whose body is Cataleptic, with his 
head resting upon one chair and his feet upon 
the back of another. These are demonstrations 
and tests which appeal to one’s common sense 
and reason, and no person, who has ever wit¬ 
nessed these phenomena, doubts their authentic¬ 
ity, especially if is extended to him the privilege 
of handling the sledge. 

CATALEPTIC STATE—HOW INDUCED. 

In this state the subject’s body becomes per¬ 
fectly rigid. 

The following instruction should be strictly 
followed: Have the subject stand perfectly firm 
upon the floor, arms straight down by his side. 
Inform him in a decided manner that you are 
going to make every part of his body rigid. Then 
place the two middle fingers of the right hand 
upon the back of his neck, pressing the spine, 
the same fingers of the left hand on the back 
above the hips, also pressing the spine. 



CATALEPTIC OR RIGID STATE. 


55 


Then in a deep, decided voice say: “Rigid, 
rigid, rigid; every part of your body is getting 
rigid, rigid, rigid.” 

Then stroke the arms and limbs downward, 
and make passes from the head down, slightly 
touching the body, all the while keeping your 
mind and will intensely concentrated upon the 
subject. Hold the thought firmly in your mind 
that he is and will get rigid. 

When his body has become rigid, take him by 
the shoulder and have an assistant take hold of 
his feet. Place his head upon the back of one 
chair and his feet upon another. His rigid body 
will hold up one or two persons' weight quite 
easily. 

CAUTION.—Do not keep the subject in the 
Cataleptic state too long. Awaken him by clap¬ 
ping your hands at the side of his head and 
loudly saying, “All right; wake up," after he has 
been placed upon his feet again. 





CHAPTER XIi. 

LETHARGIC OR INDEPENDENT SI ATE. 

Lethargic Condition Dangerous.—Bishop the Mind 
Reader.—Unmistakable Signs of Life. 

The Lethargic state is an independent condi¬ 
tion next to death, in which the subject ceases to 
have any connection with the operator, having 
passed out of his control. It is caused by the 
operator letting his subject sit inactive too long 
after he has induced somnambulism or trance. 
This is a very dangerous state and the operator 
should guard against it by keeping the subject 
interested and doing something, for if left to 
himself and preoccupied he is very liable to pass 
into this state. 

If you have more than one under control at 
the same time, keep them all busy doing some¬ 
thing to engage their attention. If you cannot 
use them all, wake some of them up before they 
pass into this apparently lifeless condition. 

There is no doubt but that Bishop, the mind- 
reader, was in this condition when the autopsy 
was performed upon his supposed dead body, as 
his heart and other vitals gave unmistakable 
signs of life. 


57 






CHAPTER XIII. 

CLAIRVOYANT OR SECOND SIGHT. 

Seeing at a Distance.—Stolen Articles Found.—Murders 
and Thieves.—Suspension of Physical Senses.— 
Lifeless Body.—Independent Action of the Mind.— 
Mediating Sense Organs.—Clairvoyant Phenomena. 
—Ability of Clairvoyant Subject.—Psychic Organ¬ 
ism.—No Possibility of Fraud.—Severe Tests.— 
Deepest Stages Best.—Hindoos of India.—Accurate 
Account of Distant Battles.—Occult Phenomena.— 
Intellectual Advancement.—Mind Invisible and Im¬ 
material. 

Clairvoyance, or seeing at a distance whereby 
a person can be put into a trance so that they 
can locate lost, hidden, or stolen articles, ferret 
out murders, thieves, etc., is possible when this 
condition is properly induced and a good Clair¬ 
voyant subject used. 

While in this condition the human mind has 
the ability to extend its faculties of conception 
far into space. The condition consists of an 
absolute suspension of the physical sense organs, 
the body appearing almost lifeless, or as if in a 
deep sleep. The ordinary way of perceiving 
through the sense organs is for the time inter- 
59 


6o 


HYPNOTISM. 


rupted and an independent action of the soul or 
mind takes place. 

This action is an immediate perceiving of 
things, conditions, and persons as they actually 
and really exist in their very nature, and not 
as they appear to us, often hypercritically 
through mediating sense organs, as clairvoyance 
is finer and farther reaching than the sight of our 
dull eyes. 

Before giving specific instructions for produc¬ 
ing the Clairvoyant state, I will give the reader 
a description of some of the phenomena of this 
trancelike condition and the ability of some of 
those whom I have had in the Clairvoyant state. 
The mind of a good Clairvoyant subject can be 
made to leave the body, so to speak, and be di¬ 
rected to any given locality anywhere in space, 
and can give an intelligent and accurate account 
of things being done at that particular place. It 
matters not whether it is in the same room, or a 
mile, or one thousand miles away, the mind will 
find the spot. Distance makes no difference be¬ 
cause the human mind or the psychic organism 
of man does not recognize space. 

One evening while giving some demonstra¬ 
tions at a social gathering in the city of Cleve¬ 
land, Ohio, I was asked to try some clairvoyant 
work, and selected a subject from among those 


CLAIRVOYANT OR SECOND SIGHT. 61 


present, fortunately securing an excellent one. 
Among the tests, was one that barred all possi¬ 
bility of guess work or fraud. The subject was 
a young man of about 24 years of age, and, after 
being put into the Clairvoyant state, he was se¬ 
curely blindfolded by two young gentlemen who 
took all necessary and unnecessary precautions 
to prevent their friend (not mine) from deceiving 
them to accommodate me, a stranger to them all. 

When all was ready one of the young ladies 
present was asked to go to the library and select 
any book she wished and go to another room, 
shut the door, and sit down ostensibly to read 
the book selected. 

The test seemed a severe one, especially with 
a new subject, and means of verification on the 
spot. I was then requested to ask the subject 
where the young lady had gone? He unhesi¬ 
tatingly replied that she was in a certain room 
in the house, naming the location of the room 
upon being asked to do so. When asked what she 
was doing he stated that she was sitting down 
reading, and then proceeded to give the name 
of the book and number of the page where the 
book was opened by the young lady. 

All of these answers, upon investigation, were 
found to be correct. The subject could tell the 
number of any person’s watch, while in this con- 




62 


HYPNOTISM. 


dition, which was more than some of the owner’s 
themselves knew. He also told of things that 
were occurring in another part of the city, which 
were afterward found to be correct. In all of 
these tests given, there was not the least possi¬ 
bility of mind reading or telepathy entering into 
the tests, as I myself was ignorant of the 
knowledge procured by the young man while in 
the Clairvoyant state, therefore he could not 
have received it from my mind. 

Nobody excepting the young lady herself 
knew the number of the page where she had the 
book open, yet he answered this question as 
readily as any of the others. All Hypnotic sub¬ 
jects do not as a rule make good Clairvoyants, 
and a person should be selected for this kind of 
work who is of a quiet and sensible disposition 
and can be put into a very deep stage of Hypno¬ 
sis. These qualifications are absolutely neces¬ 
sary if good results are obtained. 

Always put the subject asleep as in Method 
One, using the Mesmeric passes, and when the 
subject is in a deep, sound sleep state to him that 
he has now entered the Clairvoyant state and 
condition, and that while in this condition his 
mind has the ability and power to leave his body 
and go anywhere in space that you may direct it. 
Deeply impress this fact upon his mind, and 


CLAIRVOYANT OR SECOND SIGHT. 63 


keep him down deep asleep by giving sugges¬ 
tions while he is being blindfolded, then ask him 
if he is ready to go to any designated place. If 
he answers in the affirmative you can proceed 
to direct his mind to any place or locality you 
wish, and, if you have him deep enough under 
the influence, he will in a few minutes answer 
any question regarding the place or person. 

It is a common thing for the Hindoos of India 
to self-induce this condition, giving accurate ac¬ 
counts of battles going on miles away. This fact 
is well known by all familiar with India and her 
people, who are well advanced and Adepts in 
Occult Science. If human testimony is of any 
worth, there is abundant evidence reaching from 
the remotest ages to the present time, and is as 
unimpeachable as is to be found in support of 
any fact or thing, that the human mind has the 
ability, when the proper conditions are pro¬ 
vided, to leave the physical body and go where 
directed in space. 

We are now stepping into a new era. The 
future will mark the closing of this century as 
one of intellectual advancement in Psychic and 
Spiritualistic science. The century now opening 
is the era of interesting study and the advance¬ 
ment of the science of the human mind or soul 
of man. Every observing and intelligent person 



6 4 


HYPNOTISM. 


is anxious to learn more of the mind, that mys¬ 
terious immaterial and invisible part of man. 
Those who interest themselves in the study of 
Hypnotism and Mesmerism will be amply re¬ 
warded 



CHAPTER XIV. 

HYPNOSIS SELF-INDUCED 

Human Possibilities.—Material and Immaterial Forces. 
—Occult Phenomena.—Natural Laws.—Voluntary 
Hypnosis.—Dormant Powers.—Auto Suggestion.— 
Removing Pain.—Power of Suggestion Over Dis¬ 
ease.—Vital Forces.—Recorded Results.—Apparent 
Death.—Self Hypnotization.—India Fakirs in the 
Far East—Famous Holy Man.—Sealed Coffin.— 
Revived After Six Weeks Apparent Death.—The 
Sceptical Rajah.—Medical Details of Occult Phe' 
nomena.—Dr. McGregor.—Eye Witness to Disin 
terment.—Organs and Functions of Body Controlled 
—Suspended Animation.—Killed by Suggestion.— 
Dr. Hack Tuck.—Condemned Frenchman.—Disease 
, and Kindred States Produced by Auto Suggestion.— 
Morbid Suggestions.—Possibilities and Susceptibili¬ 
ties of the Human Mind. 

That Self-Hypnotization lies within the limit 
of human possibilities is an established fact. And 
this possibility becomes greater when we realize 
that everything in this wonderful world which 
consists of material and immaterial forces com¬ 
bined is based upon common sense and reason. 

All Occult phenomena, whether Psychic or 
Spiritualistic, is the result of natural laws. Noth- 
65 


66 


HYPNOTISM. 


ing ever happened but that which is due to facts, 
circumstances and conditions. 

It most certainly is a wise provision of nature 
for anyone to be able voluntarily to place him¬ 
self in the Hypnotic state. He who can by an 
effort of his will enter the Hypnotic condition 
is complete master over his own mind or soul. 

“He that ruleth his soul is mightier than he 
that taketh a city.”—(Prov. 16:32.) 

“He that hath no rule over his own spirit is 
like a city that is broken down, and without 
walls.”—(Prov. 25 :28.) 

These powers lie dormant in all mankind and 
can be easily developed by the proper applica¬ 
tion of the will, or what is known as auto or self- 
suggestion, combined with concentration. The 
author has often self-induced this condition, and 
by auto-suggestion is able to remain asleep any 
desired length of time or make any part of his 
body insensible to pain. He has repeatedly re¬ 
moved pain from different parts of his body by 
concentrating his mind upon the affected parts 
with the absolute determination and desire of re¬ 
moving the pain. 

This psychological fact demonstrates the 
power and effect of suggestion, either auto or 
spoken, on disease and pain, for when by the 
proper suggestions we place the psychic forces 



HYPNOSIS SELF-INDUCED. 


67 


on the defensive against pain, disease, and death, 
with the intention of driving them out of our 
body, we invite and receive in their place health 
and strength. But when these lines of life forces 
are weakened by adverse suggestions disease 
enters the body at that point w;here exists the 
greatest deficiency of vital force. 

To be able properly to induce this condition 
the psychic powers must be developed in the 
following manner: The beginner should go into 
a quiet room and lie down in a comfortable po¬ 
sition, and with the concentration of the mind 
and sight upon some small article or object in 
the room, let the body become perfectly relaxed. 
Take in slow regular breaths, holding the 
thought and idea in the mind (exclusive of all 
otlyer thoughts) that every breath you draw is 
putting you sound asleep, and that you are be¬ 
coming totally unconscious of your surround¬ 
ings. 

It is absolutely necessary that you concen¬ 
trate the mind and whole attention as well as 
the eyes upon the object and think only of going 
sound asleep, and that you will remain sound 
asleep for an hour, two hours, or any reason¬ 
able length of time desired. 

When self-inducing the Hypnotic sleep, a cer¬ 
tain time or hour to wake up should be decided 



68 


HYPNOTISM. 


upon and this time fixed in the mind. At the 
expiration of this self-appointed time you will 
wake up feeling greatly refreshed and strength¬ 
ened. 

These are auto-suggestions and can be given 
to suit the convenience of the sleeper, who may 
if he so desires remain in the Hypnotic sleep for 
almost any length of time. 

Recorded results show cases where the Hin¬ 
doos of India have self-induced the Hypnotic 
condition and remained in that state for six 
months, animation being entirely suspended, so 
that no signs of life could be detected. 

There are many authenticated cases known of 
apparent death being produced by self-Hypnoti- 
zation or auto-suggestions, accomplished by In¬ 
dia Fakirs and other religious enthusiasts in the 
far East. One remarkable, and I believe thor¬ 
oughly well-authenticated instance, is of a fa¬ 
mous holy man, who, to demonstrate his ability 
to some distinguished men and convince the 
Maharajah Runjeet Singh that he possessed this 
power over his psychic organism, apparently 
died and was placed in a sealed coffin, which was 
put in a vault, the entrance to which was also 
sealed, and closely guarded by soldiers. At the 
end of six weeks, the time set by himself, the 
coffin was carried out of the sepulcher in the 


HYPNOSIS SELF-INDUCED. 69 

presence of the Rajah and several credible wit¬ 
nesses, English as well as native, and when the 
coffin was opened, his body had every appear¬ 
ance of death. But, after being slowly revived 
by his faithful servant, the ghastly-looking and 
corpselike being raised up in his coffin and ad¬ 
dressed his first words to the sceptical Rajah, 
saying, “Do you believe me now?’* 

Full medical details of this phenomena are 
given by Dr. McGregor, who was an eye-witness 
to the disinterment, in his “History of the 
Sikhs.” 

There are many other well-authenticated cases 
of vivi-sepulture known, whose genuineness can 
not be questioned. 

There is another case similar to this in some 
respects, the truthfulness to which the author 
can v testify. A young man who, by practice, has 
acquired the power of being able to enter the 
Hypnotic sleep at will, can awaken at any set 
time. To effect this he has only to lie down and 
concentrate his attention on sleep, and retain the 
thought in his mind that he will awaken after a 
certain length of time. 

He is also able to apply auto-suggestion as a 
curative and can relieve himself of any abnormal 
condition. By this means he has remarkable 
control over the organs and functions of his 


7 ° 


HYPNOTISM. 


body, as was demonstrated to the entire satisfac¬ 
tion of two physicians and myself, who were 
present to witness the experiment and satisfy 
themselves whether or not it were possible for 
a human being by an effort of his will to sus¬ 
pend animation and then, as it were, come back 
to life again. Upon examination by the physi¬ 
cians before entering the state, his pulse and 
heart were found to be perfectly normal; and, 
after stating that he would remain self-hypno¬ 
tized an hour, he lay down and became per¬ 
fectly still and composed, one of the doctors 
holding his right hand while the other held a 
mirror to his mouth. 

In less than a minute his pulse began to sink 
gradually until pulsation ceased, as did all ac¬ 
tion of the heart, while not the least soil of breath 
was discernible on the mirror. 

The physicians, after a close examination, 
could not discover the least sign or symptom of 
life, and his body had every appearance of a 
corpse, animation having been completely and 
absolutely suspended, continuing so for an hour. 

Then the pulse and heart slowly and gradually 
again resumed their normal condition, as did 
the lungs and other viscera. 

It is unnecessary to state that the doctors were 
greatly surprised, and insisted upon an examina- 



HYPNOSIS SELF-INDUCED. 


71 


tion after he had resumed the normal condition, 
but failed to detect any harmful results. 

The power and effect of suggestion on the 
imagination is wonderful, and there is no ques¬ 
tion but that sickness and even death itself is 
often caused by suggestion, as is readily seen in 
an instance given by Dr. Hack Tuck. 

The victim was a Frenchman, who had been 
condemned to death for committing some crime, 
and his friends, wishing to avoid the disgrace of 
a public execution, consented to his being made 
the subject of an experiment. It was stated to 
the condemned man that it had been decreed that 
he must be bled to death. The executor then 
bandaged the victim’s eyes, and, after his arm 
had been slightly pricked, a small stream of 
warm water was made to trickle down it and 
drop into a basin, the assistants all the while 
keeping up a continuous comment on his sup¬ 
posed weakening condition. “See how pale he 
looks. He is getting faint, his heart is beating 
slower and slower, his pulse is almost stopped,” 
with numerous other remarks of this sort. In 
a short while the miserable man died with de¬ 
cided symptoms of cardiac syncope from a hem¬ 
orrhage, without having really lost a single drop 
of blood, a victim of suggestion. 

That decease and kindred states are induced 




72 


HYPNOTISM. 


by auto-suggestion and can likewise be induced 
by suggestions from without, there is no doubt. 

Let a man’s friends repeatedly tell him that 
he is looking bad, and that he does not seem 
able to be about, that he should take care of 
himself, or he will be down sick with this or 
that complaint, and it is almost a certainty that 
he will temporarily deteriorate in health. 

As in the case of the farmer who was given 
suggestion of this sort, for a joke. After being 
assured by a number of persons that he looked 
bad and was not able to be around, really did 
take to his bed and went through an unmistak¬ 
able attack of fever. Although he was in good 
health previous to the suggestions given him. 
This of course was a wrong and unwarrantable 
joke, yet these same effects are often produced 
by well-meaning persons, who have the habit 
of always commiserating their friends and ac¬ 
quaintances for not looking well. 

“Disease can be, and is, caused by morbid 
suggestion, either auto or spoken.” 

“Disease can be, and is, cured by healthful 
suggestions, either auto or spoken.” 

This is an indisputable fact known to all ad¬ 
vanced thinkers who have a scientific knowledge 
of the nature, possibilities and susceptibilities of 
the human mind or soul of man. 



CHAPTER XV. 


TO HYPNOTIZE BY TELEGRAPH, TELEPHONE 
OR MAIL. 

Subtle and Mysterious Influence.—Irresistible Power.— 
Professional Operators.—Sleep Induced by Tele¬ 
phone.—Sedate Individuals Made to Dance and 
Sing Without Their Knowledge. 

That a person can be affected and influenced 
while conversing with the operator over the tele¬ 
phone, either long-distance or local, or Hypno¬ 
tized by a telegram or letter sent by the Hypnot¬ 
ist who may be miles away in another city, is 
one of. the strange characteristics of Hypnotic 
influence, but nevertheless a true one, as can be 
quickly demonstrated by any one who under¬ 
stands the proper modus operandi. 

And startling as it may seem, the person in¬ 
fluenced in this manner has not the remotest 
idea that the message or letter he receives is the 
means of conveying to him the subtle and mys¬ 
terious influence of Hypnotism, or that he is 
already at the time of receiving the communica¬ 
tion under the influence of the Hypnotist, who 
has by a few well applied suggestions at some 
73 


74 


HYPNOTISM. 


opportune time, placed him within the myster¬ 
ious and irresistible power of Hypnotism. The 
method or means by which this is accomplished 
is known only to a few professional operators, 
and by its use can be produced some marvelous 
results. Your audience will attribute it to the 
strange Hypnotic or Mesmeric power you pos¬ 
sess. It is brought about entirely by the use 
of Post-Hypnotic suggestion. When you have 
a subject or friend deeply under the influence 
and dead asleep, say to him, “If I ever call you 
up by 'phone and say to you, you are getting 
sleepy, a sleepy, drowsy influence is coming over 
you, sleep, sound asleep, you will instantly be¬ 
come sleepy and go sound asleep standing at 
the 'phone, and will stay asleep until I wake 
you up." He will most certainly go to sleep 
standing at the 'phone, but should be seated in 
a chair by friends until you come and awaken 
him. 

To Hypnotize a person by telegraph or mail, 
give Post-Hypnotic suggestions, that, if you 
send him a message on Monday, either By wire 
or mail, informing him that to him the following 
day will be Sunday and that when he awakens 
next morning he will know and realize that it is 
Sunday. 

He will without fail arise next morning with 



TO HYPNOTIZE BY TELEGRAPH. 75 


the impression that it is Sunday, and if in the 
habit of attending services, dress and go to 
church at the accustomed time, and will not hes¬ 
itate to inquire why the church is locked, and 
will insist that it is Sunday morning. 

Take a very sedate individual and after giving 
suggestions in the proper manner, send him a 
letter saying that at four p. m. on the following 
day he will start to dance and sing. He will at 
the designated hour, no matter where he is or 
what he is doing, commence to dance and sing, 
greatly to the astonishment and horror of his 
friends. 









I 



. 









CHAPTER XVI. 


PEOPLE HYPNOTIZED AGAINST THEIR WILL. 

Hypnotized at any Future Time.—Shrewd Hypnotist.— 
Utter Helplessness.—Operator Master. 

A great deal has been said for and against any 
method or system of Hypnotizing anybody 
against their will, especially if they have never 
been previously operated upon. I will first give 
instructions for Hypnotizing against the will by 
the use of Post-Hypnotic suggestion. 

After you have once Hypnotized a person say 
to him that you can now Hypnotize him at any 
future time, that you can put him to sleep when¬ 
ever you wish, that he has no power or ability 
to resist you, and you can Hypnotize him against 
his will or wish any time you please. Of course 
if a person has never been under the influ¬ 
ence, you cannot use Post-Hypnotic suggestions 
to influence him against his will, but there is a 
way in which a shrewd Hypnotist can succeed in 
putting people under the influence who really 
do not care to be hypnotized. 

No method by which a person who has never 
been a subject can be Hypnotized against their 
77 


78 


HYPNOTISM. 


will has ever been given to the public. But be 
that as it may, the author has during his years 
of experience discovered and successfully used 
a method by which he has succeeded in Hypno¬ 
tizing a great many people against their will, 
who had never been operated upon before, which 
if strictly followed will succeed. It requires an 
extraordinary amount of determination upon the 
part of the operator to overcome the resistance 
of the person who does not wish to be put 
asleep. 

This method will be found useful at parties or 
gatherings where you may have some difficulty 
in procuring subjects if nobody present cares 
to be Hypnotized, and you can't get a willing 
subject, politely ask some member of the party 
to let you give him or her a simple test with 
their hands, saying it is nothing Hut a slight test 
and will not do any harm or hurt anybody. A 
little talk along these lines will invariably induce 
someone present to allow you to try their hands. 
Then proceed to fasten the hands of the individ¬ 
ual who just intends to let you try, as he thinks. 
After you have fastened his hands, tightly let him 
struggle, but keep his eye, and after he is satis¬ 
fied that you have him fast, release his hands in 
the regular way; then put his hands together 
a second time. Of course it is understood he 


HYPNOTIZED AGAINST THEIR WILL 79 


does not intend to let you put him to sleep and 
make him perform before his friends. That is 
his idea at least. And he doesn’t intend that 
you shall if he can prevent you. When putting 
his hands together the second time, while you 
are giving the suggestions, hold his eyes steady 
and strong until you get Him dazed. You can 
detect the dull stare coming in them, and when 
this is pronounced and an expression of utter 
helplessness takes the place of the smile that 
may have been on his lace when he sat down, 
suggest to him in a determined tone of voice 
that he cannot move or leave the chair, that 
every part of his body is paralyzed, and he will 
know by the fierce gleam in your eyes that you 
are master. You can then proceed by a few 
well-chosen suggestions to put him dead asleep 
and induce somnambulism or trance in the reg¬ 
ular way. He will ever afterwards be your sub¬ 
ject if you understand your business in giving 
Post-Hypnotic suggestions. 






CHAPTER XVII. 

INSTANTLY HYPNOTIZED. 

Instantaneous Hypnotism for Public Demonstrations.— 
At the Opera House.—Hypnotized by a Finger.— 
Marvelous Effects. 

Hypnotizing instantaneously is generally used 
in the show business when giving public demon¬ 
strations, but of course can be used by any oper¬ 
ator. A person can be instantly hypnotized, 
either on the street, in a crowd, or while seated 
in an opera house, by a wave of the Hypnotist’s 
hand, by his having previously given Post- 
Hypnotic suggestions to this effect. 

Suggest to a number of subjects when you 
have them on the stage that whenever you point 
your finger at them or pass your hand in front 
of their face they will fall asleep. When you 
have a subject asleep, suggest to him that if he 
is in a crowd, or on the street and you catch 
his eye or look at him he will become instantly 
hypnotized and will follow you anywhere. 

Of course the subject has no knowledge that 
you have previously implanted this irresistible 
81 


82 


HYPNOTISM. 


influence in his psychic composition, neither has 
the public, and the absence of this knowledge 
will cause the effects to be considered more mar¬ 
velous by your friends and the public. 




SLEEP INDUCED BY MESMERIC PASSES. 

















CHAPTER XVIII. 

HINDOO SLEEP, HOW INDUCED. 

Fakirs and Adepts of India.—Monotonous Music*— 
Peculiar Sensations of Hindoo Sleep.—Suggestive 
Position of Operator.—Completely Fascinated by 
Hindooism.—Rotary Motion of the Body.—Concen¬ 
tration Universal.—Amusing Incident of Hindoo 
Sleep.— The Conceited Gentleman.— Hindooism 
Contagious.—Complete Humiliation.—Cake Walk.— 
Good Drawing Card. 

This method or manner of inducing* Hypnosis 
receives its name from the Hindoos of India, 
where it is universally used by the Fakirs and 
Adepts of that country, who to facilitate the in¬ 
duction, use as an accompaniment some monoto¬ 
nous music. 

The Hindoo sleep is principally used in this 
country by professional showmen, who from the 
stage can succeed in putting a number of per¬ 
sons asleep while sitting in their seats in dif¬ 
ferent parts of the opera house. 

People who have entered the Hindoo sleep 
give accounts of being conscious of a peculiar 
drawing sensation while the condition is being 
83 


HYPNOTISM. 


induced. These sensations from the description 
given of them are evidently caused by the sug¬ 
gestive position assumed by the operator while 
inducing the Hindoo sleep. 

One subject in particular relates that the arms 
and entire body feel as if some power or influ¬ 
ence were drawing them up, and that just before 
the final Hypnosis is induced his arms felt as 
if they were about two inches long. Other sub¬ 
jects tell of similar experiences and symptoms. 

To the close observer the expression on the 
face of a person while the Hindoo sleep is being 
induced is decidedly interesting, some subjects 
appearing as if completely fascinated and pos¬ 
sessed of the idea that their body is really par¬ 
alyzed. This frozen expression can be removed, 
however, by suggestion after the subject be¬ 
comes sound asleep, the countenance assuming 
a contented and peaceful expression if the proper 
suggestions are given. 

When wishing to induce the Hindoo sleep, the 
operator should sit upon the floor, with his legs 
crossed and drawn up something after the man¬ 
ner of a tailor, then after placing the thumb and 
little finger of either hand together at their tips, 
he should begin a slow rotary motion with his 
body, but that part of the body below his hips 
should remain perfectly motionless. 


HINDOO SLEEP. HOW INDUCED. 85 


This rotary motion can be successfully accom¬ 
plished by a little practice upon the part of the 
operator. During this operation the eyes of the 
Hypnotist should be concentrated upon those of 
the person whom he wishes to put asleep. The 
operator can take his position any desired dis¬ 
tance from the subject, who should be sitting in 
a comfortable chair. 

When operating from the stage the Hypnotist 
should sit in the center of the forward part of 
the stage, and during the movements of his 
body should cast his eyes over the entire audi¬ 
ence, with no individual concentration, but by 
his will must influence everybody present, or 
as many as possible. This should be kept up 
for about ten or fifteen minutes and at the end 
of that time a good operator will probably have 
quite a number of persons sleeping in their seats 
in different parts of the opera house. 

If desiring music as an accompaniment a low 
monotonous tune may be played from an organ 
or a melodeon, which are best for this purpose. 
While the operator is inducing the Hindoo sleep 
he should remain silent as only mental sugges¬ 
tion is given, and when operating from the stage 
he should, after having induced the sleep in a 
number of persons, come from the stage and 
awaken all of them individually, but before doing 




86 


HYPNOTISM. 


so it is better to give suggestions to the effect 
that they will be all right, and then nobody will 
feel any of the drawing sensations before spoken 
of, after being awakened. 

The number of people that can be simulta¬ 
neously affected or influenced in this manner 
depends of course upon the ability of the opera¬ 
tor and the size of his audience. 

There happened during a public demonstra¬ 
tion given by the author in one of the Eastern 
states quite an amusing incident. 

Among the earlier arrivals at the opera house 
one evening was a young gentleman accompa¬ 
nied by two of his lady friends. He stated in a 
positive and decided manner to those around him 
that nobody could hypnotize him, and that he 
would be there when I put him asleep and made 
a fool out of him. I apparently paid no attention 
to this conceited fellow during that part of the 
show preceding the Hindoo sleep. But when 
the time came for inducing it I gave him and 
his two friends a considerable of my attention, 
which amount I am sure was sufficient. 

Shortly after beginning to induce the Hindoo 
sleep the young lady sitting at his right side 
showed decided symptoms of sleepiness, and di¬ 
rectly her head sank over and she went sound 
asleep, whereupon the young gentleman gal- 




HINDOO SLEEP, HOW INDUCED. 87 


lantly placed his hand under her head, with the 
intention of resting it, which was just what I de¬ 
sired him to do. By this time the other young 
lady sitting at his left became afflicted in the 
same manner, she also going sound asleep, and 
the young man supported her head also with his 
left hand, much to the amusement of those whose 
attention had been attracted. I then proceeded 
to give the young gentleman whose hands were 
already filled with trouble, an individual but slow 
and sure application of Hindooism. 

The expression upon his face was interesting 
in the extreme; and I think but for his former 
statement that he would be there when I put him 
asleep he would certainly have attempted to 
leave the opera house, for in his eyes before they 
closed in sleep could be seen a look which was 
meant as an appeal to save him the humiliation 
of being put asleep after such’ positive state¬ 
ments upon his part, that this could not be ac¬ 
complished. 

After waking up his lady friends and some 
others who were sleeping, I took the young fel¬ 
low upon the stage and had him do a cake walk 
and chase an imaginary flock of bees from his 
flowing locks. It is unnecessary to state that he 
was the whole show from then on, for, being a 
young man of considerable importance in the 



88 


HYPNOTISM. 


city where he resided, he caused roars of laugh¬ 
ter by such actions as fishing in an imaginary 
stream from the edge of the stage, using a broom 
stick for a pole, and going among the audience 
soliciting shoes to shine. 

Scores of the egotistical young man's friends 
came every night during the balance of the week 
to see him perform, for being well known and a 
splendid subject, he was a good drawing card. 





CHAPTER XIX. 

SYMPTOMS OF HYPNOSIS. 

The final induction of Hypnosis is generally 
preceded by a decided contraction of the pupils 
of the eye, they then dilate, and remain largely 
dilated until the normal condition is again as¬ 
sumed. 

There is also noticeable a marked quivering of 
the eyelids. These vibrations are often continued 
for some time after the eyes have closed in sleep. 
In all deep Hypnosis the eyeballs turn upward 
and remain in that position until the subject is 
awakened or opens his eyes during somnambul¬ 
ism. 


H 






CHAPTER XX. 

THE DIFFERENT STAGES OF HYPNOSIS. 

Important Classifications Necessary.—Attempts at Clas¬ 
sifications.— Unsatisfactory Classifications.— Prof. 
Bernheim.—Detailed Classification. 

The depth to which each subject enters Hyp¬ 
nosis varies with each individual; but there are 
certain classifications which are important, as 
some pass into a light sleep, others into a deep 
sleep; this depends upon the susceptibility of the 
subject to Hypnosis and the ability o! the oper¬ 
ator. 

As a rule the Hypnotic sleep deepens with 
every Hypnosis till about the fifth or sixth in¬ 
duction; by this time the subject has usually 
reached his deepest stage. 

These different stages or degrees of Hypnosis 
vary from a condition which only an expert Hyp¬ 
notist can detect as Hypnosis, to a state in which 
strikingly abnormal conditions are present. The 
variety of stages are many and different observ¬ 
ers have made attempts to classify them. These 
various classifications are, however, extremely 
unsatisfactory, no two agreeing, their divisions 
91 




92 


HYPNOTISM. 


being from two up to ten, which latter view is 
held by Prof. Bernheim. 

It would be a waste of time to dwell upon the 
different opinions thus advanced, and it is 
useless to attempt a more detailed classification 
than those given here: 

1. Light Hypnosis. 

2. Deep Hypnosis. 

3. Profound Hypnosis. 

4. Somnambulistic state. 

5. Cataleptic state. 

6. Clairvoyant state. 

7. Lethargic state (dangerous). 

Profound Hypnosis—No memory on return¬ 
ing to the normal condition of anything that had 
been said or done while in the Hypnotic condi¬ 
tion. 




CHAPTER XXL 
HOW TO WAKE A SUBJECT. 

No apprehension need ever be felt by the prac¬ 
tical operator who has been properly instructed, 
about having any difficulty in getting a subject 
out of Hypnosis, or awakening him from the 
Hypnotic or Mesmeric sleep, for when the proper 
suggestions, which are an important part of 
Hypnotism, have been given when the subject 
is asleep, he will wake up instantly when told 
to do so by the operator. 

No case is known where an operator, who 
understood his business, and had confidence in 
his ability as an Hypnotist, has ever had the 
least difficulty or trouble in waking a subject. 
Where this has occurred it was due to ignorance 
on the part of the operator, who had not been 
properly instructed. 

After Hypnosis has been induced and the 
subject is sound asleep give him decided sugges¬ 
tions that when you count three he will wake 
up, that he cannot remain asleep but will have 
to wake up immediately. Then awaken him by 
counting three, and saying in a loud voice, “All 
93 




94 HYPNOTISM. 

right; wake up/ 5 and he will be wide awake. 
The operator should never lose his presence of 
mind or become excited if a subject does not 
wake up when told to do so, but should in a 
confidential manner repeat the suggestions and 
make him wake up by loudly saying, “All right 
now/' 




CHAPTER XXII. 


CURING DISEASE BY HYPNOTISM AND 
SUGGESTION. 

Long Words and Ominous Sentences.—Suggestive Thei- 
apeutics.—Materia Medica.—Nervous Diseases. 

The physician who attempts to frighten his 
patients by telling them that bad results follow 
the induction of Hypnosis is beginning to be 
generally recognized as one using long words 
and ominous sentences wherewith to cloak his 
own ignorance; for, as everyone with a knowl¬ 
edge of the true principles of Hypnotism knows, 
great benefit and good are to be derived by its 
use. The physicians and surgeons who have a 
knowledge of Hypnotism and are combining 
Suggestive Therapeutics (which is the treatment 
of disease by Hypnotism and Suggestion) with 
the present method of practicing, are fast out¬ 
stripping their slower brothers who are depend¬ 
ing wholly upon their learning of physiology and 
Materia Medica as the only means of combating 
disease. 

This is a mistake, and the physician who does 
not consider a knowledge of psychology as nec- 
95 



9 6 


HYPNOTISM. 


essary and of as much importance in treating his 
patients and curing disease as is physiology, is 
as ignorant of the origin, action and cure of 
disease as he is of the science of being. 

All diseases and especially those of a nervous 
origin can be entirely cured, while the patient is 
quietly engaged enjoying a peaceful sleep, from 
which he will awaken free from pain and greatly 
relieved in mind and body. When desiring to 
treat any person, always induce the sleep by the 
Mesmeric passes as given in Method One and 
when you have the patient in a sound, quiet 
sleep give suggestions to the effect that when 
you wake him up he will be entirely free from all 
pain, and that when he goes to bed at night he 
will go sound asleep and have a good night's 
rest and will feel greatly rested and improved in 
the morning. 

The suggestions should be given of course to 
suit the individual case you are treating, the 
operator using his best judgment. And after 
treating a few cases he will have no trouble in 
relieving all in whom he has induced the sleep. 





CHAPTER XXIII. 

PERSONAL MAGNETISM. 

Magnetic Personality.—Power of Fascination.—Agreea* 
ble Personality.—Disagreeable Characteristics.— 
Don Quixote.— Decidedly Unpopular.— Honesty 
Best. 

To those who wish to acquire that peculiar 
magnetic personality which gives charm of man¬ 
ner and power of fascination that is sure to win 
and retain the respect and admiration of those 
with whom you meet and associate with through 
life, particular attention must be given to their 
personality and an effort should be made to cul¬ 
tivate an agreeable personality. 

It always pays to be pleasant. Nobody is as 
unpopular as a disagreeable person, or one of an 
aggressive disposition. We all have certain dis¬ 
agreeable characteristics in our nature; these 
should be eradicated by close thought and atten¬ 
tion upon our part. During conversation avoid 
arguments by all means and never contradict 
anybody. Make this a rule above all others. 
If you are urged to announce an opinion, do it 
rather by asking questions, as if for information 
97 




9 8 


HYPNOTISM 


or by suggesting doubts. When anyone ex¬ 
presses an opinion which is not yours you must 
know that he has as much right to his opinion 
as you have to yours, and why should you ques¬ 
tion it? 

His error does you no injury, so why should 
you become a Don Quixote and try to bring all 
men by force to one opinion? If a fact be mis¬ 
stated it is possible he is gratified by a belief of 
it, and you have no right to attempt to deprive 
him of the gratification. If he wants information 
he will ask for it, then give it to him in meas¬ 
ured terms; and, if he still believes his own story 
and shows an inclination or desire to dispute the 
fact with you, hear him and say nothing. 

It is his affair, not yours, if he prefers error, 
and you should let him keep it and not make 
yourself decidedly unpopular by trying to get it 
from him. Make a special study of the charac¬ 
teristics of those you wish to impress favorably, 
and while conversing with them, always look 
them straight in the eye; do not stare, but culti¬ 
vate a steady gaze, always holding their eye while 
you are talking, and with your will impress them 
with the fact that you are telling a truth and 
mean what you say, as it always pays to be hon¬ 
est. The eyes are the windows of the soul .of 
man, and as he reckoneth in his heart so he is. 




PERSONAL MAGNETISM. 


99 


A man with an honest heart always has a truth¬ 
ful expression in his eyes, and people will have 
confidence and trust in him, which is essential to 
success in life and business. 





















SUGGESTED ANAESTHESIA. 

Hat Pins Through the Fore-Head, Cheeks and Lips 



















CHAPTER XXIV. 

HYPNOTISM AND CRIME. 

Dangers of Hypnotism.—Religious Views.—Criminal 
Events.—Moral Nature.—Criminal Suggestion.— 
Judges and Lawyers.—Criminal Assaults.—Hypnot¬ 
ism, Ether and Chloroform.—False Pleas.—Crimi¬ 
nal Reports.—Fatal Syncope. 

In considering the danger to which the public 
is liable from a criminal or improper use of Hyp¬ 
notism, we must dismiss from our minds as far 
as possible the popular ideas with regard to the 
subject. 

The playwright and the novelist have both ap¬ 
parently been at pains to write the greatest 
amount of nonsense in the shortest possible 
space, and they have been at liberty to write 
with no knowledge and little understanding, 
since the public who listen to and read their pro¬ 
ductions care little and know less. It would be 
a waste of time to discuss the various fallacies 
which underlie this class of writing. Suffice it 
to say that no work of this character with which 
the author is acquainted gives any true idea of 
the Hypnotic state or the dangers which may at¬ 
tend its use. 

The members of the medical profession who 

IQI 




102 


HYPNOTISM. 


have attacked the use of Hypnotism have shown 
very little acquaintance with the subject; their 
views appear to be religious rather than scien¬ 
tific, and it is unnecessary to discuss opinions 
which are not based upon scientific observation. 

The dangers of Hypnotism are, I believe, often 
exaggerated, but there is probably no question 
but that it can be used for evil purposes, and 
that by criminal suggestion a person can be made 
to commit crime. 

Recent criminal events which are supposed to 
have been caused by Hypnotism have been the 
means of bringing the question of the employ¬ 
ment of Hypnotism for criminal purposes prom¬ 
inently before the legal and medical professions, 
with the object of finding out to what extent 
it can be used to aid crime. 

Different opinions have been advanced as to 
whether or not it is possible by the means of 
Hypnotism to make a person commit a crime or 
an act that is against their moral nature. 

There are many who claim that this cannot be 
done, while others maintain that in Hypnotism 
there is a power which will give one person such 
absolute control over another, as to insure the 
accomplishment of crimes without exposing 
themselves, but of course a belief either way does 
not prove tHe truth or falsity of the question. 



HYPNOTISM AND CRIME. IC3 

I believe that the question should be met with 
perfect frankness, and think that by all means 
judges and lawyers should closely study the pos¬ 
sibilities of Hypnotism as an aid to crime. 

There is scarcely any doubt but that criminal 
assaults may be committed with no subsequent 
recollection of the occurrence. But why should 
this be made a contention against the use of 
Hypnotism, when we have exactly analogous 
abuses of ether, chloroform, and many other 
drugs ? 

Every person when Hypnotized acts out his 
or her own individuality, and if the wish and 
desire to do right and avoid crime and evil is 
strongly grounded in a man's soul, or an essen¬ 
tial part of his individuality it is not probable 
that suggestion would cause him to so widely 
depart from these principles as to commit an 
evil act, or crime, any more than would the per¬ 
tinacious solicitations of friends cause a sincere¬ 
ly temperate man to take a drink of liquor. 

And I assume that a false plea of having acted 
under Hypnotic influence is a much more prob¬ 
able event than the perpetration of crime by its 
use. If the contention against a universal knowl¬ 
edge of Hypnotism being given to the people is 
because it possibly may be used for criminal as¬ 
sault, the same contention should be made 




104 


HYPNOTISM. 


against the use of chloroform, as criminal re¬ 
ports and records show that it has, and can be 
used for criminal assault. And in the face of 
this fact it must be acknowledged that there is 
less danger of criminal assault by the use of Hyp¬ 
notism, than there is from drugs, because it is 
not everybody that is so susceptible to Hypnotic 
influence as to become anaesthetic, while every¬ 
body becomes anaesthetic and amnesic under 
the influence of drugs. 

It is not to be supposed that well-meaning peo¬ 
ple will object to a spread of the knowledge of 
Hypnotism because of this contention. 

It is my opinion, and also my experience, that 
the power in every human being for good is more 
potent than that for evil, and that it would be 
very much harder to make the good man do 
wrong than influence the bad man for good. 

From my observation and experience I think 
it safe to state that the possibilities of Hypno¬ 
tism being used for criminal purposes are very 
remote. 

For, supposing that a Hypnotist did get ab-. 
solute control over a subject and rendered him 
so sensitive to his suggestions that he could in¬ 
duce him to commit thefts and other crimes, and 
at the same time be unconscious of the prompt¬ 
ings or influence which had impelled him to com- 


HYPNOTISM AND CRIME. 105 

mit the act. Could not the subject of this crim¬ 
inal suggestion be re-hypnotized by another op¬ 
erator and made to disclose the name of the one 
who had hypnotized him for criminal purposes 
and intent? For all enlightened men know that 
if a subject is hypnotized a second time he will 
remember all the suggestions which have been 
made and all the events which took place during 
the previous Hypnosis, but on awakening he will 
have no recollection or knowledge of these 
events. Still, in the hands of an expert Hypnot¬ 
ist, it is difficult to place any definite limitations 
on the reaction of a subject to criminal sugges¬ 
tion, as he might commit a crime from their 
effects. It would also be comparatively easy for 
the Hypnotist to kill his subject, with no lesion 
to be found post-mortem. 

In good subjects the heart-beat can be mod¬ 
ified to a remarkable degree by suggestion, and 
a continuation of skillful suggestion might pro¬ 
duce a fatal syncope; again, suggestion may be 
made by the Hypnotist in his own interest 
against those of the subject. 

Of course it is important that every one should 
recognize that the dangers of Hypnotism when 
used by the ignorant, the unscrupulous, or the 
malicious, are real and not imaginary. Although 
it would be nonsensical to attack Hypnotism it- 




106 HYPNOTISM. 

self, because like every other agency it is open 
to abuse, the person who is going to be hypno¬ 
tized has a right to demand that he have some 
guarantee that the qualifications of the Hypnot¬ 
ist and his good faith and honor are unquestion¬ 
able. 




CHAPTER XXV. 

HYPNOTISM AND INSANITY. 

Attracting the Insane.—Border-Land of Insanity.— 
Morphine, Opium, Cigarettes and Narcotics.—En¬ 
slaving Habits.—Mental Habits.—Mental Faculties, 
Wrecked and Ruined. 

Every one who has ever had anything to do 
with the insane, knows how difficult it is to get 
them to fix their attention on anything except 
their delusion for any length of time, but after 
gaining an influence over them they can often 
be greatly benefited and cured. 

Cases of this sort, however, are of rare occur¬ 
rence and until some mechanical contrivance can 
be invented for attracting their attention and 
holding it long enough to induce Hypnosis, there 
is not much that can be done in the direction 
of helping these unfortunate people out of their 
miserable condition. 

There is, however, an extensive field for the 
use of Hypnotism in that borderland of insanity 
occupied by dipsomania. 

There are to be found a great many persons 
who are on the verge of insanity by the exces- 
107 



io8 


HYPNOTISM. 


sive use of morphine, opium, cigarettes and nu¬ 
merous other narcotics. 

In cases of this kind Hypnotism and sugges¬ 
tion are found to be very powerful agents, and 
can be made the means whereby the unfortunate 
victim of these habits is enabled to take his first 
step towards reformation and cure. 

The morphine and opium habit can be success¬ 
fully treated by Hypnotism and suggestion, it 
usually taking about ten or twelve days to effect 
a permanent cure. 

When these habits are cured by Hypnotism 
there is an absence of that distressing mental an¬ 
guish and suffering which is always felt when 
these enslaving habits are quickly broken off by 
other means. 

Persons who are addicted to the use of these 
narcotics usually enter a deep state of Hypnosis, 
sometimes at the very first induction. When de¬ 
cided suggestion is given to those who use nar¬ 
cotics or stimulants that they can and will sleep 
and rest without their use, it has the desired 
effect. 

One pitiful case cured by the author was that 
of a young lady who had become addicted to the 
use of morphine by its having been prescribed 
by a young physician, for a very painful injury. 

When her parents, who were quite wealthy, 


HYPNOTISM AND INSANITY. 


109 


accidentally discovered that their daughter was 
using this terrible drug, they refused to give her 
money with which to purchase it. 

After vainly trying to sleep and being unable 
to receive any rest for two nights, she became 
desperate and sold her diamond ring, a gift from 
her mother, to buy morphine with. 

She received her first treatment during the 
forenoon, with decided suggestions that upon re¬ 
tiring that night she would immediately drop 
into a sound, quiet sleep and not awaken until 
eight o’clock the next morning. These sugges¬ 
tions were carried out, and in two weeks she 
was permanently cured of all desire for the drug. 

The cigarette habit, which quite often causes 
insanity, can be broken in this manner, as can 
masturbation, which can be cured by'Hypnotism 
and suggestion when all other remedies and 
means fail, as these are mental habits. A con¬ 
tinuation of them will rack and ruin the mental 
faculties. Drugs cannot cure these habits as 
drugs have no mental effect. 







CHAPTER XXVI. 

HYPNOTIZING ANIMALS. 

Diverse Organizations.—India Fakirs and Aissouans.— 
Venemous Snakes Handled.—Continuous Stimula¬ 
tion.—Strange Eggs Hatched.—Professional Horse 
Trainers.—Timid Mind.—Fearless Mind.-—Animals 
Simulate Death 

That the hypnotization of animals and snakes 
is possible to a limited extent, has been demon¬ 
strated in various ways, by experiences on ani¬ 
mals of such diverse organizations that there is 
scarcely any question of its being within the limit 
of possibilities, especially by the Fakirs and the 
Aissouans of India, who are reported to be able, 
by the use of music, to so charm and fascinate 
the most venomous snakes that they are ren¬ 
dered perfectly harmless, and that these snake- 
charmers can induce the snakes while in this con¬ 
dition to closely imitate the snake-charmer’s 
movements. 

The author has frequently induced a state of 
Catalepsy (if this may be considered an accurate 
term for the condition induced) in rabbits, frogs, 
guinea pigs and fowls, by a monotonous continu- 

iii 



I 12 


HYPNOTISM. 


ous stimulation. And while in this condition 
they would remain perfectly motionless and un¬ 
responsive to ordinary stimulation. 

This state can be best induced by firmly fixing 
them in one position for three or four minutes 
and then quietly removing the restraining influ¬ 
ence, and it will be found that the animals will re¬ 
main in this position, however abnormal, for 
quite a length of time. Experiments of this kind 
is a well illustrated example of hypnotic influence 
in animals. 

Another interesting experiment of this sort is 
to draw a chalk line and hold a chicken with its 
beak on this line, and it will be found that the 
creature will remain in this fixed position for 
several minutes. 

The method of changing the nest of a setting 
hen, which is familiar to most farmers, owes its 
success to Hypnotism. The way this is done 
is to hold firmly the fowl's head under its wing 
for a few minutes, and then rock it slowly to and 
fro, with the result that it apparently goes to 
sleep. While in this condition it can be removed 
to another nest, or from one nest to another, and 
seems to have no realization of the change. It 
will contentedly remain sitting upon the strange 
eggs until they are hatched. 

A dog may be rendered docile and obedient by 



HYPNOTIZING ANIMALS. 113 

the means of a fixed look, and will seldom attack 
a person if looked straight in the eye. 

The tiger always endeavors a rear attack to 
avoid this look, and there is scarcely an animal, 
but that can be kept in check if not allowed to 
escape the eye of the person attacked. 

Many animals self-induce Hypnosis by simu¬ 
lating death the moment they are disturbed by 
falling into a state of complete insensibility, but 
apparently recover as soon as the cause of their 
alarm is removed. 

Professional horse trainers evidently owe their 
exceptional control of unmanageable horses to 
something akin to Hypnotism. 

One favorite plan used by expert horse train¬ 
ers is to look the horse straight in the eye, all 
the while giving their own head a rotary move¬ 
ment similar to that used for inducing the Hin¬ 
doo sleep. In a few minutes the unruly horse 
becomes perfectly obedient, greatly fearing him 
Who has by this peculiar process become its 
complete master. 

That the condition of mind maintained by a 
person while around or handling a horse influ¬ 
ence it and has considerable to do toward gov¬ 
erning the horse’s actions, there is little doubt. 
A man with a fearless mind and not afraid of 
horses will pass them in safety, while one with a 



U4 


HYPNOTISM. 


timid mind and afraid of those dangerous parts 
(his heels) will unhesitatingly be kicked skyward. 

Everybody is familiar with the fact that snakes 
often charm birds and frogs, fixing them so they 
cannot move, when they then become the easy 
prey of the murderous reptile. 

An interesting story is related of a woman in 
Northern Ohio, who one day while washing 
some clothes was Hypnotized by a large snake. 
When found by her friends she Had become so 
charmed and fascinated by the snake that her 
body was rigid and immovable. Wondering 
what had caused the trouble one of the party 
who happened to glance upon the ground dis¬ 
covered a snake. After the snake was killed the 
woman again regained consciousness. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 

HYPNOTIZING BY A ROTATING MIRROR. 

A mirror is sometimes used in hospitals when 
it is desired to Hypnotize a large number of pa¬ 
tients at once. It consists of four small mirrors, 
fastened upon cross pieces which when set in 
motion rapidly revolve, and is termed the rotary 
mirror. 

Some people, it is found, by gazing at this in¬ 
strument become Hypnotized at once, and by 
its means a Whole roomful of people can be Hyp¬ 
notized in a very short space of time. 

Another curious little instrument which is said 
to be now employed altogether for inducing 
Hypnosis at the famous Charcot clinic in Paris, 
France, consists, 1 am told, of a plain black 
rubber cylinder about four inches long and an 
inch and a half in diameter. In it is a little re¬ 
volving disk, set flush witK the surface and about 
the size of a silver quarter. 

This disk is divided into four segments, two 
of which are dead black and two white, and it is 
set into rapid motion by pressing a button con¬ 
nected with some coiled springs inside. 

115 


116 


HYPNOTISM. 


It is said the operator stands in front of the 
subject who is to be Hypnotized, and holds the 
curious little instrument about three inches from 
a point midway between the brows. 

The patient is then told to concentrate his 
mind and gaze upon the little wheel, something 
slightly fatiguing for the reason that it throws 
the eyes a trifle out of focus. In about four or 
five seconds the button is pressed and the disk is 
set in silent motion. The swift whirling of the 
disk brings about the degree of concentration 
necessary as a preliminary to producing Hypno¬ 
sis, and is said scarcely ever to fail. 

The mind is momentarily emptied, so to speak, 
of any other thought or idea, and is in a condi¬ 
tion highly susceptible to suggestion. 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 

MIND AND BODY, OR THE SCIENCE OF BEING. 

Sorrow and Gloom.—Origin and Cause of Disease.—* 
Mental Forces.—Science and Art of Living.— 
Problem of Disease.—Pure Thoughts.—Bodily Im¬ 
perfections.—Thoughts Entertained and Maintained. 
—Parental Individuality.—Sea of Life.—Hereditary 
and Environments.—External Impressions.—Im¬ 
pure Thoughts.—Afflictions and Misery.—Cause and 
Effect.—Premature Grave.—Unwelcome Guest.— 
Morbid Tendencies.—Hosts of Good and Evil.— 
Fate, Ambition and Revenge.—Tragic Deeps of 
Earthly Life.— Mental Impressions.— Narcosis.-^ 
Disappointment and Gloom.—Fear and Expectancy, 

“As a man thinketli in his heart, so he is.” 

(Prov. 23 7.) 

We all must know that every human being 
prefers health and happiness to disease and mis¬ 
ery, and that sorrow and gloom are but the re¬ 
sult of mistakes. When we look with pity upon 
those around us, upon their pain and poverty, 
their sorrow and despair, we realize the truth of 
Shakespeare’s words, who was great and good 
enough to say: 

“There is no darkness but ignorance.” 

117 




n8 


HYPNOTISM. 


It is only ignorance of the origin and cause of 
disease and pain, that makes sickness and mis¬ 
ery so prevalent. 

Many persons are loud in their lamentations 
and wonder why God has sent these afflictions 
upon them, while they bring them upon them¬ 
selves, by an improper use of their mind, or 
mental forces. 

This is the great fundamental error of exist¬ 
ence and the cause of all disease, sorrow and des¬ 
pair, as very few have any true knowledge of the 
science and art of living. 

The puzzling and perplexing problem of dis¬ 
ease finds its only rational solution in the rela¬ 
tion that exists between mind and body. 

The question is often asked why so many souls 
pass out of the physical body through the agency 
of disease? Why is it that you so seldom hear 
of a natural death ? Why so few persons have a 
perfectly sound and normal body? 

There is but one logical answer, the human 
body is developed arid strengthened by the mind 
or soul within. And good, pure healthy thoughts 
build and make a strong body. 

a A\\ that we are, or ever will be; 

Is the result of thought.” 

—DeLaurence. 


MIND AND BODY. 


119 

It is right thinking, or pure thoughts, that 
give health and happiness; while wrong think¬ 
ing, or bad thoughts cause bodily imperfections 
and disease. 

No observing or intelligent person will deny 
that a despondent or gloomy condition of mind 
affects the health. The body is the outgrowth 
of the mind, representing the nature and condi¬ 
tion of the life forces within it. In the right 
control and direction of thought, lies the remedy 
to cure and heal disease and pain, for we must 
deal with causes, and not effects. 

A mind perfectly controlled and directed in 
the proper channels of strength and health giv¬ 
ing thoughts, will produce and maintain a nor¬ 
mal healthy body. 

The human mind is a loom—constantly weav¬ 
ing. Our thoughts are the warp and woof of 
that fabric the mind ^weaves, which composes 
and builds our body. If the thoughts out of 
which the fabric has been woven are good, pure 
and health-giving thoughts, we have a strong 
healthy body, free from disease and pain; but if 
our thoughts are gloomy, or evil, and impure, 
then our body which is the fabric woven from 
this impure and defective warp and woof, will be 
afflicted with disease and ailments. 

Our Manner of Thinking.—The thoughts that 




120 


HYPNOTISM. 


are entertained and maintained in the mind or 
soul, shape and form the destiny of man. 

Bringing to him sickness or health, poverty 
or wealth, afflictions or happiness, and takes him 
either to Heaven or Hell. 

All that we are, or ever will be, is the result 
of what has been thought, either by ourselves or 
our mothers. The mother by her condition of 
mind molds and forms the characteristics and 
traits of her child. 

Children are always stamped with parental in¬ 
dividuality. Therefore every one sails this great 
sea of life, which is composed of mind, destiny, 
and will, in a bark formed of two substances,— 
hereditary, and environments. Our surround¬ 
ings from which we receive external impressions, 
or suggestions, furnish us with though^ material. 
If we receive into our heart or soul, good mate¬ 
rial for pure health-giving thoughts, we have 
strong healthy bodies. If we accept or select 
that which is back and makes impure and evil 
thoughts, we have weak and diseased bodies, and 
are surrounded by afflictions and misery. 

“And he said, that which cometh out of a 
man, that defileth the man.”—(Mark 7:20.) 

The right control and direction of thought is 
whereby the soul receives health and happiness. 


MIND AND BODY. 


I 21 


Thought influences, builds and controls every 
organ and function of the physical body. 

N Mental discouragements and depressions are 
accompanied by disinclination for exertion and 
a sense of bodily fatigue. 

A combination of symptoms and complaints 
follow disappointments and worry, and the re¬ 
moval of the cause is followed by an immediate 
removal of the effect. 

A depressed or wearied condition of mind, in¬ 
hibits life and energy, and a constant dwelling 
of thought on some real or imaginary trouble, 
wrecks the mind and destroys the human body. 
While worry sends to a premature grave or the 
insane asylum all who welcome or accept it as a 
constant companion. The extent to which it 
kills is appalling to contemplate, and we should 
drive it out of our mind as we would a thief or 
an unwelcome guest from our house. 

It is the duty of every man to suppress his 
evil and morbid tendencies, and encourage and 
develop those that are good and noble. 

For bad is he, indeed, who is possessed oi no 
good qualities. We all must know that in every 
human soul, as in the smallest bud or flower, are 
encamped the opposed hosts of good and evil, 
of disease and health, over which flow all the 
tides and waves of destiny and will, over which 



122 


HYPNOTISM. 


sweep all the storms of fate, ambition, and re¬ 
venge, upon which settle the gloom and dark¬ 
ness of despair and death, and all the sunlight of 
content and love. 

Every human soul at birth is launched upon 
the mighty sea of right and wrong, of disease 
and health, of joy and grief, of life and death. 

And it is only by the knowledge of the science 
of being that we are able to avoid the rocks and 
tragic deeps of earthly life. 

Physical disease and discomfort are always 
traceable to mental causes, and are mental in 
origin, as the material body always responds to 
mental impressions. 

There is an abundance of evidence reaching 
from the remotest ages to the present time, to 
support or demonstrate this fact. 

“A merry heart doeth good like a medicine, 
But a broken spirit drieth the bones.” 

—(Prov. 17:22.) 

A quiet, pleasant and composed condition 61 
mind maintains a healthy body. 

“Sleep knits up the raveled sleeve of care.” 

—DeLaurence. 

Joy and happiness do the system far more 
good than drugs. Narcosis (sleep produced by 


MIND AND BODY. 


123 


narcotics) leaves the system depleted and weak¬ 
ened. While the sleep of those with a peaceful 
and contented mind restores and builds up the 
wasted energies of the body. 

Disappointment and gloom fills the physical 
body with disease and pain, sapping life’s vitality 
and energy. 

Hatred and revenge poison the blood and he 
who entertains revengeful thoughts brings a 
curse on himself. 

Anxiety and fear, or an irritable condition of 
mind, brings on hysteria, insomnia and other 
nervous diseases. 

Those who are confident in their ability to 
ward off disease and sickness, thereby placing 
the life forces on the defensive against its en¬ 
trance into their system, can expose themselves 
to contagious diseases without any fear of con¬ 
tracting them. 

This is especially true of professional nurses 
and physicians who are so accustomed to being 
among the sick that they naturally have no fear 
of exposing themselves to the most contagious 
disease. 

It is this fear and expectancy of taking a dis¬ 
ease, and which fills the mind of most people 
when they enter a sick room, or are in any way 
exposed, that invites disease and makes the body 



124 


HYPNOTISM. 


susceptible by weakening its forces, which, if 
properly governed, will throw off the most con¬ 
tagious disease known. 

“For the thing which I greatly feared is come 
upon me, and that which I was afraid of is come 
unto me.”—(Job 3:25.) 



CHAPTER XXIX. 


TELEPATHY, MIND READING AND SPIRIT¬ 
UALISM. 

Transmission of Thought.—Inherent Power.—Physical 
Senses. — Telepathy. — Thought Transference. — 
Mind Reading.— Psychic Forces.— Subconscious 
Mind.—Mental Impressions.—Psychic Organism.— 
Independent Action.— Sense-Perception.— Psychic 
Action.—Material Forces.—Second Sight.—Simul¬ 
taneous Action.— Material World.— Mind Upon 
Mind.—Intense Concentration.—Deep Emotions.— 
Mentally Agitated.—Suspension of Physical Senses. 
—Clairaudience.—Trance.—Psychic Activity.—Im¬ 
pressions and Influences.—Physical Laws.—Chem¬ 
ical Decomposition.—Death.—Evolution.—Soul and 
Body.—Condition of Existence.—Cause of Exist¬ 
ence.—Departed Spirits.—Birth to Death.—Psychic 
and Material Forces.—Natural Laws.—Psycholog¬ 
ical Conditions.—Spiritualistic Phenomena.—Mani¬ 
festations and Communications.—Immortality.—De¬ 
parted Souls.— God’s Universe.—Premonition of 
Death.—Agent and Recipient.—Thought Vibrations. 
—Thought Influences.—Clairvoyants, Mediums and 
Mind Readers.— Guilty Conscience.— Influences 
Transmitted.—Love and Devotion. 

Telepathy is the transmission or communica¬ 
tion of thought from one mind to another, by an 
inherent power in all mankind, which enables 
him to transmit or communicate his thoughts or 
125 


126 


HYPNOTISM. 


ideas to another independent of the physical 
sense organs. 

These phenomena, accurately speaking, are 
called Telepathy, but are also known as Mental 
Suggestion, Thought Transference, Mental Im¬ 
pression and Mind Reading. 

This power, which lies dormant in each of us, 
is an action of the mind or psychic forces, which 
many designate as the soul, subjective or sub¬ 
conscious mind of man, and by which he is able 
to communicate or perceive mental impressions, 
thoughts, and influences, independent of the or¬ 
dinary or objective means of communication. 

The physical sense organs are the mediums 
by which and through which the mind or psychic 
organism externalizes itself, and also the means 
by which the human mind receives external 
knowledge and impressions. 

These sense organs or mediums transmit and 
express the thoughts, desires, emotions, and 
wishes of the soul or mind of man. 

They also convey to the mind within the body 
knowledge, influences, impressions and intelli¬ 
gence from without. 

Telepathy is the communication or transmis¬ 
sion of thought or the peculiar and actual con¬ 
dition of one mind to another independent of, 
and without the use of, these physical senses. 


MIND READING AND SPIRITUALISM. 127 


This transmission or sense-perception is most 
successful during an absolute suspension of these 
mediums or physical sense organs. 

The fact of mental impressions, modifications, 
telepathy and all near and distant action of the 
psychic forces is known to all familiar with the 
well known laws which regulate psychic action. 

The soul or mind of man, which is his actual 
existence, consists of an organism of psychic 
forces externalizing itself in and through the 
physical organism of material forces which con¬ 
stitute the human body. 

These two stand in the same relation to each 
other as thought and the expression of thought. 

Now when this psychological view and fact is 
applied to the subject, it must be readily seen 
that for these psychic forces there exists no 
space; and that the success of telepathy (psychic 
action) does not depend upon nearness of space 
but upon the proper psychic relations which 
must exist between the agents and the recipi¬ 
ent's mind. When these conditions have been 
conformed to, it matters not whether they be in 
the same room or thousands of miles apart, the 
result is the same. 

It is a well known and established fact that by 
a willing, a strong desire and concentration of 
mind in the agent directed toward' the recipient 


128 


HYPNOTISM. 


that thought transference, or telepathy, takes 
place. This demonstrates that there is no dis¬ 
tance in space between two minds. 

This is known to be a fact, not only in the 
transmission of thought and the process of mes¬ 
merizing but also in those singular cases of 
second-sight and of reading the past, present, 
and future of another mind. 

All of this clearly demonstrates that the suc¬ 
cess or result of these phenomena depends upon 
actual psychologicaf conditions of the mind and 
is entirely independent of space, which is an at¬ 
tribute of the corporeal world. It being clearly 
a spaceless action of mind upon mind, as the 
psychic forces are spaceless and, therefore, en¬ 
tirely independent of external extension. 

These forces act where they are and yet ap¬ 
parently on corresponding forces far away in 
space, because for them there exists no space. 
There being a simultaneous action of forces upon 
forces, or mind upon mind, no matter where 
these forces are stationed in the material world 
or space. 

The psychic organism or forces are not con¬ 
fined in and by space, as they always act wher¬ 
ever and whenever they find corresponding 
psychic forces to be acted upon. 

Thus acts the human mind or soul which is 


MIND READING AND SPIRITUALISM. 129 


an organism of psychic forces, and is most cer¬ 
tainly a spaceless action of mind upon mind, 
while the mind or soul has its abode in the physi¬ 
cal body. 

Phantasms, apparitions and all psychic and 
spiritualistic phenomena are clearly the action of 
a purely psychic nature, of one psychic organ¬ 
ism upon another, and usually takes place when 
a person Is in great danger or otherwise men¬ 
tally agitated and has his mind fixed upon some 
distant relative or person. 

The sudden coming into consciousness of an 
absent friend or relative who personally appears 
soon after proves the action of the human mind 
or psychic forces at a distance and their immedi¬ 
ate action where willed by intense concentration 
of the mind or soul; for when by strong desire 
and deep emotions, the mind, that is, the entire 
psychic organism, becomes so mentally agitated 
that the ordinary way or means of perceiving 
through the medium or instrumentality of the 
bodily organs or physical senses is for the time 
interrupted (the physical senses being entirely 
suspended) and an independent action of the 
psychic forces, or mind (Clairaudience), takes 
place instead. 

Every one can understand why in this state 
(trance) the body apparently becomes almost life- 


13° 


HYPNOTISM. 


less, or as if in a deep sleep, and upon the other 
hand, why this psychic activity intensely con¬ 
centrated upon another mind or person is capa¬ 
ble of communicating or transmitting thoughts, 
impressions, or an influence to another, there 
being an immediate effect and action of forces 
upon forces, and not, as a great many think, of 
mind upon matter, as this action is entirely in¬ 
dependent and separate from the physical body. 

For what has the body to do with that action— 
a body cannot, nor does not, act at a distance, 
so all observing people must consider it en¬ 
tirely the action of the soul or mind, as the hu¬ 
man mind during normal health is a substantial 
psychic organism, and most certainly has action 
independent of the body. 

The human soul is an organism of psychic, 
and not of material forces, and as such lies abso¬ 
lutely out of the range of mechanical and chem¬ 
ical analysis and consequently also beyond the 
grasp of the physical laws of dissolution, and 
therefore cannot fall a victim to chemical decom¬ 
position. Therefore what follows after death, 
that is, after the separation of soul and body? 
The soul is still subjected to the laws and con¬ 
ditions of evolution, for when the soul abandons 
the body it merely changes a condition which is 







SUGGESTED ANAESTHESIA—Hat Pins Through the Arm. 





MIND READING AND SPIRITUALISM. 131 


no longer of use for its progress or future evo¬ 
lution. 

The cause remains all the same, the psychic 
forces or soul continue in their action, which is 
an immediate perceiving of things as they really 
and actually exist, and not as they appear 
through mediating physical sense organs. 

Death is simply a change in the condition of 
existence, but does not affect in the least the 
cause of the existence, any more than it does 
its activity; and therefore it may be assumed and 
asserted that departed spirits (the souls of men) 
continue to exist after so-called death. Every 
observing person will admit that the soul con¬ 
stantly increases in internal strength and intelli¬ 
gence from birth to death. 

Many may ask by what right do I assume 
that the soul has a continual and immortal exist¬ 
ence after it abandons the body in the society 
of which it is no longer able to increase its pow¬ 
ers and consequently unable to make any further 
progress ? 

Our personality is not lost by bodily death. 
We shall not be formless and disembodied shad¬ 
ows. For we cannot die. Paul says: “Although 
the outer man perish, the inner is renewed day 
by day,” suggesting the existence of an imper¬ 
ishable soul or spirit within the human body. 




132 


HYPNOTISM. 


Why the simple fact of the soul’s continued 
increase and growth in strength up to its de¬ 
parture from the body. It is then that man dies 
not because life (the vital power of soul) leaves 
him, but because the soul departs from the body, 
but by no means ceases to exist. 

This assumption is in accord with the nature 
of the soul of man and the laws by which its 
psychic and material forces combine. 

Taking this psychological view of the action 
of the soul or mind of man, which is the result 
of natural laws while the soul inhabits the body, 
and whose psychic action is entirely independ¬ 
ent of the physical body, when the normal 
senses are suspended, it is no violent assumption 
to assume that the mind or soul of man can 
when the proper psychological conditions Have 
been provided, receive and send mental sugges¬ 
tions or communications independent of the 
physical senses or body, and that the human soul 
when it becomes an immortal spirit by having 
passed out of the body should, and does sustain 
the same relation and psychic action toward the 
mind of mortal man, after its becoming an im¬ 
mortal spirit that it did while an inhabitant of 
the body. 

That the mind of man is susceptible and can 
be influenced or receive a communication from 


MIND READING AND SPIRITUALISM. 133 


an immortal spirit or soul which has passed out 
of the body is a fact known to all having a good 
and true knowledge of spiritualistic phenomena. 

There is plenty of human testimony that the 
souls of the dead do return, manifestation and 
spirit communications come to us in our high¬ 
est and purest condition of mind. 

It is then that the soul asserts its immortality. 
This evidence demonstrates that the human 
mind or soul can and does exist without the 
physical brain or body, and is an intelligence 
still, when disconnected from the material body. 

This furnishes proof of a future life for which 
so many crave, and for want of which so many 
live and die in anxious doubt, so many in posi¬ 
tive disbelief. 

Every human heart hungers for the presence 
and return of the dear departed. They come to 
us, we feel their presence, realize their influ¬ 
ences, yet we heed them not, due to ignorance 
of the science of the human mind or soul. 

Possibly external and scientific proof of all 
this phenomena cannot always be readily se¬ 
cured on the minute, but can the mind of man 
be measured with a rule, or a human soul 
weighed in a balance, or seen and dissected un¬ 
der a microscope? 

The wise philosophy of some of our most sa- 



134 


HYPNOTISM. 


pient scientists is inadequate in things pertain¬ 
ing to the human heart or soul, and their omi¬ 
nous head-wagging over facts it will not account 
for, certainly looks foolish to intelligent and 
discerning people. 

They accomplish much good work in their 
way, but they cannot dissect the human mind or 
soul of man, or measure God's universe. 

Most every person will acknowledge that 
Telepathy or thought transference independent 
of the normal senses is possible. To support this 
fact plenty of evidence can be obtained by any 
observing person. 

For instance, let some terrible accident hap¬ 
pen to a distant relative or friend, who is far 
away, and we receive a premonition or mental 
impression of the very facts of the case. Many 
persons have been heard to remark that they 
had a warning or impression that some near or 
loved one was sick and in danger. 

Now many people have got up in the morn¬ 
ing after an almost sleepless night, to receive 
bad news of some sort. They say, “I knew it. 
I felt something was wrong.” Plenty of evi¬ 
dence and similar cases of this kind can be 
found. 

One case among others which have come un¬ 
der the author’s notice was that of a lady resid- 



MIND READING AND SPIRITUALISM. 135 


ing over two hundred miles from her sister, who, 
when last heard from, was enjoying her usual 
good health. Upon retiring one night at her 
accustomed bed time, she went to sleep as usual, 
but was awakened about two a. m. by, as she 
supposed the voice of her sister calling her. She 
heard her sister call her twice by her given name, 
and got up, supposing she had come unexpect¬ 
edly during the night, and went to the door 
with the intention of admitting her, but found 
no one there. 

This greatly puzzled her, for as she stated aft¬ 
erwards she was positive of being wide awake 
when her name was called the second time, and 
that she recognized Her sister’s voice. The next 
morning at seven o’clock she received a telegram 
stating that her sister had died unexpectedly 
and alone, between two and three a. m., of heart 
trouble. 

This, strictly speaking, was what is termed 
Clairaudience, and was caused or Brought about 
by the intense desire of the stricken one to see 
and speak to her sister before she died. Real¬ 
izing as she did that she was dying, her mind 
became so deeply agitated and was so strongly 
concentrated upon Her distant sister that she re¬ 
ceived this warning or premonition of death. 

Two persons will often simultaneously ex- 


136 


HYPNOTISM. 


press the same thoughts or ideas in the same 
words, or one will say I was thinking of that 
very same thing myself. 

Many times we think or speak of some per¬ 
son whom we have not expected^ and, coinci¬ 
dent with our thoughts, they appear at the door. 

As stated before, distance does not make any 
essential difference in the transmission of 
thought, only as to the extent ft is taken into 
consideration by the agents or recipients, who 
if they lack confidence of their ability to project 
their thoughts to remote places away in space 
and to receive such communications and intelli¬ 
gence as might seem possible if the agent and 
recipient were not so far apart, will not be suc¬ 
cessful. 

Confidence is absolutely necessary, and dis¬ 
tance or space must not be taken into consider¬ 
ation at all, for as much as it is considered, just 
that much will it detract from the ability of the 
one who entertains these adverse, ideas. 

The mind is directed into space by confidence 
and belief; without this confidence the mind will 
hesitate and accomplish nothing. 

The agent, or transmitter, is the one who de¬ 
sires to impress the mind of another at a dis¬ 
tance. 

The recipient is the person who receives a 


MIND READING AND SPIRITUALISM. 137 


mental impression or suggestion from the mind 
of another. 

It is absolutely necessary that the recipient let 
his mind become passive, and as far as possible 
hold his physical or objective senses in complete 
abeyance, so that he may be the more readily 
impressed and receive the communications from 
the sender. 

The transmitter, or agent, upon his part must 
concentrate his mind and keep it upon any par¬ 
ticular object, thought, or impression he wishes 
to project to the recipient. 

No special mental effort is necessary to trans¬ 
mit or convey these thoughts or impressions. 
The agent should concentrate and compose his 
mind upon what he wishes to convey, and think 
intently of it, and the effect will be transmitted 
to the mind of the recipient. 

The success of thought transference depends 
upon the vividness and ability of the sender to 
picture in his imagination any selected object, 
thought, or impression he wishes to transmit to 
the recipient, and the ability of the recipient to 
become passive, letting his mind Become quiet 
and ready to receive any impression, and also to 
be able to judge correctly what he is desired to 
receive. 

For the new beginner it is best that the dis- 



138 


HYPNOTISM. 


tance be not great, and the first few experiments 
in Telepathy should be tried with the agent in 
one room and the recipient in another. After the 
agent has decided upon what he wishes to trans¬ 
mit let him sit down and concentrate his mind 
as directed above, the recipient of course being 
in another room. 

A few figures will be found best at first, then 
different objects can be used; these should be 
followed by transmitting short phrases and 
words, and in time the distance and amount of in¬ 
formation can be enlarged upon. 

If wishing to communicate with some person 
in another city at a distance a certain time should 
be decided upon for the transmission to take 
place. The agent and recipient should both make 
notes of impressions and the names of objects 
transmitted and received. 

To the observing and intelligent person the 
effect, influence, or action of mind upon mind is 
instructive and interesting. Much can be learned 
by observing and noting the different effects and 
results of these psychic forces both in public and 
private life. 

Go into an opera house, church, or public hall 
and concentrate your mind upon some certain 
person sitting in front of you, and if your con¬ 
centration is perfect the person will invariably 


MIND READING AND SPIRITUALISM. 139 


turn and look at you unconscious of course, that 
you had intentionally made him turn his head or 
influenced and willed him to do so. 

Most every one has noticed the many impres¬ 
sions and thought influences that vibrate be¬ 
tween two persons when shaking hands for the 
first time. These vibrations are especially pro¬ 
nounced if each has his eye fastened upon the 
other. 

Again, on going into a dark room where some 
person is concealed, and quiet, his presence is 
often felt and made known to you by the effect 
of his mind upon yours as he is thinking of you. 
Not unlikely his mind is anxious as to his dis¬ 
covery and this anxiety upon his part betrays 
him to you. 

Step up quietly to the bedside of a highly sen¬ 
sitive person who is sound asleep and he immed¬ 
iately becomes aware of your presence, although 
you have not made an audible sound, and if he 
does not awaken he will move uneasily in his 
sleep. 

There is scarcely a person who, but some time 
or another is his life, Has not become conscious 
of being stared at, and people who are especially 
sensitive in this respect are quite often annoyed 
and ill at ease if made the object of attention. 

It is best if you belong to this class of sensi- 


HYPNOTISM. 


140 

tives to make your mind positive, thereby throw¬ 
ing off these influences and not permitting them 
to annoy you. This can be done by assuming a 
determined condition of mind, as man. should al¬ 
ways meet man with an honest, decided and 
steady gaze. No clairvoyant, trance-medium, or 
mind reader can fathom the positive mind, while 
a passive or uneasy mind is like an open book 
to those who understand this branch of psychic 
science. Criminals are often detected in this 
manner, as their uneasy and guilty condition of 
mind, of which they are only too self-conscious, 
surrounds them with an influence which is trans¬ 
mitted to the shrewd officer, or detective, who, 
when he receives an impression that the man is 
guilty, shadows him rn suspicion, and ultimately 
arrests the guilty man, his suspicions having 
been well grounded. 

In the elucidation of this subject, I have en¬ 
deavored to state fairly that there does exist 
means based upon natural law, by which 
thoughts, influences and communications can be 
transmitted to another mind, as well as commu¬ 
nications received from those of our loved ones 
whose souls have passed out of the body; but not 
out of worldly existence—for it is clear we can¬ 
not deny the possibility of departed spirits act¬ 
ing upon material as well as immaterial forces in 


MIND READING AND SPIRITUALISM. 141 


this wonderful world, which consists of material 
and immaterial forces combined. 

This possibility becomes greater when we think 
of, and realize the many bonds and strong ties 
of love and devotion which fasten the dear de¬ 
parted to what they have left behind, and which 
assures their nearness, presence, wishes and de^ 
sires, to act upon what they loved and left at 
death, 



CHAPTER XXX. 


MAGNETIC HEALING. 

Miraculous Cures.—Boy Phenomenon.—Magnetic Force, 
or Personal Magnetism.—Valuable and Worthless 
Opinions.—Natural Gift.—Miraculous or Superhu¬ 
man Power.—Vital Forces.—Forces Medicatrices.— 
Physical and Moral Qualifications.—Methods and 
Processes. —Fundamental Principles. 

“And these signs shall follow them that be¬ 
lieve; They shall lay their hands upon the sick, 
and they shall recover”—(Mark 16:17, 18). 

Within the last few years the attention of the 
public has been attracted by a great many people 
being cured by what is generally known as mag¬ 
netic healing. 

And in all parts of the country people are 
practicing it and I think it quite safe to state 
that many persons have been cured by this means 
after they had been placed upon the list of incur¬ 
ables. The seemingly miraculous cures made by 
the so-called Boy Phenomenon and others who 
have startled the community at different points 
by performing their cures in opera houses and 
public halls, have been the means of placing be¬ 
fore the eyes of the public evidence which has 
astonished many intelligent and observing peo- 
*43 


144 


HYPNOTISM. 


pie, ana caused them to hesitate before they con¬ 
demned this manner of healing the sick as a 
humbug. 

There are a great many people who have con¬ 
siderable doubt as to the existence of any such 
thing as magnetic forces or personal magnetism, 
or that when the hands of a healthy person are 
placed upon the body of a sick person that there 
can be transmitted any influence or power which 
heals disease or removes pain. 

When persons say that they do not believe 
in this, or that, or that they do not believe certain 
things can be done, it should make little differ¬ 
ence to the man who has as much right to inves¬ 
tigate these things for himself as others have to 
express an opinion. 

No person's view, or opinion should be ac¬ 
cepted for more than it is worth. Opinions or 
views are valued as is everything else, according 
to their composition, or the material from which 
they are molded or made. The person who has 
had an opportunity to observe and make scien¬ 
tific investigations upon some certain subject, 
certainly has an opinion more valuable than one 
who has formed individual ideas in an egotistical 
and ignorant manner, and composed of limited 
views and observation. Every man, before he 
accepts an opinion or view manufactured by an- 


MAGNETIC HEALING. 


145 


other, who may have been incompetent, has a 
perfect right to seek the best obtainable or refuse 
all advanced and investigate for himself. 

The world is full of people who are always 
ready to express themselves upon every subject, 
and the less their opportunity for scientific in¬ 
vestigation upon any one point the greater is 
their desire to relieve themselves of their hastily 
formed ideas. 

Such people are, in the first place, not com¬ 
petent to render an opinion, else they would not 
offer gratuitous ones. 

Magnetic healing as is everything else in 
occult science, or pertaining to the human mind, 
based upon natural law, and magnetic healing, 
or the power to heal and cure disease, is not a 
natural gift, which a few favored ones possess, 
but is a gift common to all mankind. 

Every living person has this power, if shown 
how to develop it and use it to the best advant¬ 
age of themselves and others. 

Any person of ordinary intelligence and good 
physical health, can become a magnetic healer. 
He need not necessarily be supposed to possess 
any miraculous or superhuman power or be en¬ 
dowed with an over supply of magnetism. To 
heal or cure an afflicted person by what is termed 
personal magnetism, simply consists of the 


146 


HYPNOTISM. 


proper direction and application of the vital 
forces, which every living person possesses. As 
an illustration: let any person place the thumb 
and fore-finger of the right hand upon the head 
of another person, at the base of the brain, the 
same fingers of the left hand upon the front part 
of the head, above the eyes; keep the fingers in 
this position, remain perfectly quiet for a short 
time, and the person will feel the so-called mag¬ 
netism or magnetic current as it passes from the 
fingers through their head. 

This is the vital force or personal magnetism 
passing from one person to another. This mag¬ 
netism, or healing force, can likewise be directed 
or sent to any part of the human body by mak¬ 
ing passes or rubbing the body. Whenever an 
abnormal condition exists in any part of the 
body and the vital forces or magnetism of a 
healthy person are applied or directed to that 
particular part of the body, it removes the ab¬ 
normal condition by forcing nature or the vital 
forces to the afflicted parts. Magnetism having 
for its object the development of what the physi¬ 
cians call the forces medicatrices—that is to say, 
the seconding of the offices that nature makes 
to relieve itself, and the facilitating of the cures 
to which it is disposed—it is essential to act with 
consonancy in aid ol nature, and never oppose it. 


MAGNETIC HEALING. 


147 


Only one sentiment ought to animate the per¬ 
son who attempts to heal in this manner, the 
desire of doing good to him whose cure he un¬ 
dertakes, and with whom he ought to occupy 
himself wholly, giving all his attention during 
the treatment. 

This force or magnetism is directed by the 
will, and belief is necessary to induce the healer 
to make firm and steady use of the faculties he 
possesses. Confidence is only the consequence 
of belief. It differs in this only. Mr. B. believes 
himself to be endowed with a power whose real¬ 
ity or existence he does not doubt. In order to 
have good results, or so that the healer may 
have a beneficial effect upon the person he is 
treating, there must exist between them a moral 
and physical sympathy, as there is between all 
the members of an animated body. 

Moral sympathy is established by the desire of 
doing good to the person who desires to receive 
it; or by ideas or wishes which occupy them 
both equally, forming between them a communi¬ 
cation of sentiments. 

When this sympathy is well established be¬ 
tween the healer and his patient then you have 
provided the proper condition to transmit this 
healing power or influence. 

Thus, the first condition necessary is a steady 



HYPNOTISM. 


148 

will; second, is the confidence which all must 
have in their own powers; the third is benevo¬ 
lence or the desire of doing good. One of these 
qualities or conditions may supply the other to 
a certain degree, but to have effect at the same 
time energetic and salutary the three conditions 
must be united. 

No Magnetic Healer should undertake to treat 
a person for whom he feels any repugnance, or 
if he fears to catch the disease. For to act effi¬ 
caciously the healer must feel himself drawn 
towards the person who requires his care or 
treatment, take an interest in him and have the 
desire and hope of curing, or at least relieving 
him. 

The power of healing or that of doing good 
to our fellow beings by the influence of the will, 
by the communication of the principle that sus¬ 
tains our health and life, being the most delight¬ 
ful, and most precious that God has given to 
man, he ought to regard the employment of this 
faculty or power as a religious act which de¬ 
mands the greatest self-collectedness and the 
greatest purity of intention. 

Magnetic Healing or the power to heal dis¬ 
ease, is composed of three principles: First, the 
will to act; second, a sign, the expression of that 
will; third, confidence in the means employed. 




MAGNETIC HEALING. 


149 


If the desire of doing good be not united to 
the will to act there will be some effects, but 
these effects will be unsatisfactory and irregular. 

Confidence, which is an essential condition for 
the healer's mind to be in, is not necessary on 
the part of the person being treated, as he can 
have a beneficial effect equally upon those who 
believe and those who do not believe in Mag¬ 
netic Healing. 

It suffices if the patient yields himself up pass¬ 
ively, making no resistance. Nevertheless, con¬ 
fidence contributes to the efficaciousness of Mag¬ 
netic Healing, as it does to that of most reme¬ 
dies. 

The faculty or power to heal disease and cure 
the sick exists in every human being; but all do 
not possess it in the same degree. This differ¬ 
ence of power to heal in various persons arises 
from the superiority which some people have 
over others in moral and physical qualifications. 
Among the moral qualifications are confidence 
in one's own power, energy of will, facility in 
sustaining and concentrating the attention, the 
sentiment of benevolence which unites us to 
every suffering being, strength of mind, which 
enables one to remain calm and collected under 
all circumstances. 

Of physical qualifications, the first is good 


HYPNOTISM. 


150 

health, which gives to us that peculiar power to 
influence and heal, different from all other known 
powers or forces of nature, and of which we 
recognize the existence and degree in ourselves 
only by the trial and use we make of it. 

As this magnetic power or influence emanates 
from the healer’s body and is directed and con¬ 
trolled by an effort of fiis will, the external or¬ 
gans by which we act are the most proper to 
convey it with the intention determined by the 
will. For this reason it is best to use the hands 
and eves to heal, and at the same time giving 
encouraging suggestions as they sometimes pro¬ 
duce vital energy and have a beneficial effect 
upon the mind and body of the patient. 

Although the choice of this or that process or 
method is not essential in order to direct this 
influence or power, it is best to adopt some cer¬ 
tain method and use it habitually without think¬ 
ing of it, so as to neyer become embarrassed 
(thereby detracting the mind and will from the 
patient) by studying what motion or passes are 
best. 

The processes used by most Magnetic Healers 
are to approach the sick upon the right side, if 
convenient, and make passes over the body from 
the head downward, not touching the body. But 
in cases of lameness and where the pain is pro- 


MAGNETIC HEALING. 


151 

nounced in any organ or function, the hands 
should be rubbed or drawn downward over the 
parts, either outside or under the clothes. For 
headache draw the hands backward from the 
middle of the forehead, having the patient close 
his eyes and remain perfectly quiet. 

The faculty or power to heal exists equally and 
in the same degree in the two sexes; and women 
can be and ought to be preferred as Magnetic 
Healers, for women, especially when they require 
treatment for female troubles. 

The observing reader will readily see that the 
fundamental principles of curing and healing dis¬ 
ease, is an application of the life forces or per¬ 
sonal magnetism by an effort of the will and a 
desire to cure or relieve those who are sick and 
afflicted. 







CHAPTER XXXI. 

THE PHENOMENA OF HYPNOSIS. 

ConcL^on Normal After Hypnosis.—Awakened In¬ 
stantly.—Apparent Lethargy.—Practical Hypnotist. 
—Dangers of Experiments.—Ignorant Operators.— 
Ten Days Sleep.—Various Opinions.—Minimum 
Average.— Experimental Results.— Princeton or 
Cornell Students.—Hysterical Conditions.—Differ¬ 
ent Nationalities.—Recorded Results.—Dr. Lie- 
beauit.—Dr. Van Rentezhen.—Dr. Wellenstrand.— 
Simulation Impossible.—Muscular Contraction.— 
Rigidity.—Motor Impulses Inhibited.—Ammonia.— 
Organic Functions Affected. 

The condition of a person after being Hyp¬ 
notized is always found to be perfectly normal, 
and in the hands of an experienced Hypnotist the 
subject never finds that he is suffering from any 
such thing as “drowsiness,” or any ill-effects 
whatever. In fact, great benefit is to be de¬ 
rived, especially by those suffering from nervous¬ 
ness, inability to sleep, etc. 

There is never any delay or difficulty in wak¬ 
ing a subject, or ending Hypnosis, as in all cases 
the subject is brought back to the normal con¬ 
dition instantaneously. But in the hands of an 
153 


*54 


HYPNOTISM. 


unskilled or ignorant operator, however, the sub¬ 
ject may pass from the waking state into a con¬ 
dition of apparent lethargy, and out of the con¬ 
trol of the experimenter, who is able neither to 
awaken nor influence his subject. Of course 
these misfortunes can never occur to the prac¬ 
tical Hypnotist. 

But the author has known of many such cases, 
and the danger of experiments in Hypnotism by 
persons who have never been properly instructed 
cannot be too strongly insisted upon. When 
once it is found that the subject does not awaken 
in obedience to the operator when the proper 
suggestion has been given, no further effort 
should be made, but an experienced Hypnotist 
should be sent for, or, if one cannot be found, 
the subject should be left alone and allowed to 
sleep it off. 

In the number of cases of the kind which have 
come under the author’s notice, the harm done 
was almost entirely due to the ignorant and fu¬ 
tile attempts made to arouse the subject, where¬ 
as if he had been left quietly alone he would have 
eventually awakened himself. 

The duration of the Hypnotic sleep of a sub¬ 
ject if not awakened is very variable, and de¬ 
pends upon how deep the subject has entered 
Hypnosis. If the sleep be light, the subject will 


THE PHENOMENA OF HYPNOSIS. 155 

often return to the normal state in a very short 
length of time, but if in a very deep stage, the 
sleep may continue from thirty to forty-eight 
hours. Thus an expert operator can keep a per¬ 
son asleep for almost any length of time. The 
author has been able to keep two subjects asleep 
for ten days and nights. 

Various opinions have been advanced, some 
well, many ill-informed, with reference to the 
persons who are not hypnotizable. It would be 
nonsensical to affirm of any particular disposi¬ 
tion or temperament that lends itself to Hypno¬ 
sis, when we find that over eighty per cent, of 
all person tried is the minimum average of any¬ 
one who properly understands Hypnotism and 
Mesmerism from a psychological point and in its 
practical application. Speaking from his own 
experimental results, the author has found that 
the class presenting the least difficulties and gen¬ 
erally giving satisfactory experimental results is 
found in young men of average education and of 
fairly all-round qualities, such a man, for in¬ 
stance, as is a typical Princeton or Cornell stu¬ 
dent or graduate. 

Persons who are very stupid and conceited 
resemble one another in being difficult subjects. 
While idiots are not hypnotizable and the insane 
are excessively difficult to influence. Sex does 



*5 6 


HYPNOTISM. 


not appear to materially affect the question, the 
greater percentage being in favor o! men. There 
is among the physicians a somewhat common 
misconception prevalent which regards hysteri¬ 
cal conditions as likely to indicate easy subjects. 
Hysteria, or nervousness, however, is as a rule 
the source of considerable difficulty, and never 
makes the induction of Hypnosis an easy mat¬ 
ter. Nationality has nothing whatever to do with 
the matter, for taking nationalities of different 
temperaments there is found scarcely any differ¬ 
ence in the recorded results, as the following 
figures will show: 

Out of 1,012 persons tried, Liebault of France 
hypnotized 985; while Van Rentezhen in Hol¬ 
land hypnotized 169 out of 178 persons, and Dr. 
Wellenstrand of Sweden hypnotized 701 out of 
720 tried. Similar results are given by good 
operators in this and other countries. 

All learned men who understand Hypnotism 
agree with reference to its medical application 
that the operator or physican who cannot hyp¬ 
notize at least eighty per cent, of his subjects or 
patients is a poor operator, whose opinion is of 
no value. 

Among students and members of colleges and 
universities the percentage varies from 90 to 94. 
The author, judging from his observation and 


THE PHENOMENA OF HYPNOSIS. 157 


experience with a large number of cases, is, on 
the whole, inclined to regard susceptibility to 
Hypnosis as generally belonging to men with 
brains of a good quality; and without question 
the process of hypnotizing well educated people 
is easier and takes less time. 

In all the deep stages of Hypnosis complete 
anaesthesia can be produced in any certain part 
of the body so that the most powerful electric 
currents can be administered without the patient 
evincing the least sign of discomfort. Teeth may 
be extracted or filled and any surgical operation 
may be performed without knowledge or pain to 
the patient. The fact that anaesthesia can, by 
decided suggestions, be produced during Hyp¬ 
nosis in any part of the body, provides the oper¬ 
ator with means of demonstrating that there is 
no pretending or simulation on the part of his 
subject. 

The pulse, respiration, pupil of the eye and 
temperature can be greatly modified by means 
of suggestion during Hypnosis. It would be 
surprising indeed i? a condition in which such 
decided modification of the human organism can 
be induced could not be of great good from a 
therapeutic point of view, and many members of 
the medical profession in this and other countries 


HYPNOTISM. 


153 

are using it to great advantage in the treatment 
of nervous and other diseases. 

The extent to which it is possible to obtain 
muscular contraction is readily observed in the 
catalepsy of the whole body, when all of the 
voluntary muscles become absolutely rigid. In 
this condition the subject may be placed with 
his head upon the back of one chair and his 
feet upon another, and his body will remain in 
a perfectly straight line between tKese two points. 

So complete is the rigidity that the body, 
while in this position, will sustain an extraordi¬ 
nary weight without giving or bending. 

A young lady, by no means athletic or ex¬ 
ceptionally strong, while in the Cataleptic state, 
will sustain with no apparent uneasiness and 
without any bad results, a weight exceeding a 
hundred and seventy pounds. 

Almost every one is familiar, if only by re¬ 
pute, with the ordinary phenomena of the Hyp¬ 
notic state. Motor impulses can easily be in¬ 
hibited and any of the physical sense organs 
suspended, as deafness and blindness caused. 
The sense of smell can be suppressed so that 
thirty-seven per cent ammonia can be held under 
the nostrils without the subject evincing any sign 
of inhaling a disagreeable odor. 

During deep Hypnosis' if the right suggestions 


THE PHENOMENA OF HYPNOSIS. 159 


are made the subject will eat pepper under the 
impression that it is sugar, or he will eat a cake 
of soap with gusto, with the impression that it 
is a piece of sweet cake; in fact, every sense and 
organic function of the physical body can be 
modified or affected, 











CHAPTER XXXII. 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF HYPNOSIS. 

Spirit and Matter.—Mind and Matter.—Elements of 
Hypnotism.— Various Phenomena.— Two Sub¬ 
stances.—Proper Route.—Principles Proclaimed.— 
Confidence and Application.—Natural Laws.—Mind 
Influences Matter.—System Essential to Success.— 
Words of Warning.—Action and Reaction.—Public 
Good. 

To attempt to explain Mesmeric or Hypnotic 
phenomena by the laws of galvanism or elec¬ 
tricity, anatomical consideration of the functions 
of the brain or nervous system, would be very 
much like explaining vegetation by crystallog¬ 
raphy. 

It is important and essential for learned men 
and the medical profession to know that the 
most profound knowledge of the science of 
physiology will never bring them to the discov¬ 
ery of the theory of Mesmerism or Magnetism. 
But nevertheless fhis knowledge will be import¬ 
ant and useful to keep the observers from mak¬ 
ing many errors by enabling them to distin¬ 
guish what necessarily belongs to Mesmerism 
and Magnetism and what is due to other causes, 
161 


16 a 


HYPNOTISM. 


by furnishing them with means of verification, 
and authorizing them to reject all consequences 
essentially opposite to the well known physical 
laws. A close study of this work will enable the 
keen observer to gain a good idea of the phe¬ 
nomena of Hypnotism, Mesmerism and Magnet¬ 
ism, and that man is composed of a physical 
body, and a spiritual soul, or psychic mind, and 
that the power or Influence he exerts over his 
fellow men partakes of the properties of both 
substances. 

Hypnotism, Mesmerism, or Animal Magnet¬ 
ism considered as a power or an influence, is de¬ 
cidedly different from all tfie other powers or 
forces of nature. It has its natural laws which 
are not identical with the laws of matter. Con¬ 
sidered as a science, it has singular and peculiar 
principles which cannot be learned, except by 
close observation, no idea of which can be ob¬ 
tained from other well known sciences, so much 
I can state with certainty, but I permit myself 
here to add as an opinion, common with me and 
many enlightened men, but which' I merely pro¬ 
pose as an opinion— 

That the theory of Hypnotism, Mesmerism 
and Personal Magnetism is based upon this 
great principle, that there are in nature two 
kinds of substances, decidedly different in their 



TELEPATHY. 

Transmitting- a Mental Impression, 


















THE PSYCHOLOGY OF HYPNOSIS. 163 

characteristics and properties—mind and matter; 
that these two substances act, the one upon the 
other, but each one possessing laws peculiar to 
itself. 

Among the laws that regulate the action of 
matter upon matter, many have been success¬ 
fully brought to light by observation, determined 
by calculation, and verified by experiment; such 
are the laws of motion, of attraction, of elec¬ 
tricity, of transmission of light, heat, etc. This 
is not so with the human mind, for although the 
existence of our soul has been demonstrated and 
many of its faculties and weaknesses are known 
to us by observation, its nature is a mystery, for 
its union with organized matter or the physical 
body is inconceivable. Many of the psychologi¬ 
cal laws by which mind affects and acts upon 
mind are unknown. 

Human being are composed of body and soul, 
act upon, and influence living bodies by the 
combination of the peculiar properties of these 
two substances. It is observable that there is 
in this combined action two separate and dis¬ 
tinct elements and a mixed element. 

A knowledge of the laws that govern and reg¬ 
ulate these two substances constitutes the sci¬ 
ence of Hypnotism, Mesmerism and Magnetism, 
and 5 t is only by comparing and closely ob- 


HYPNOTISM. 


164 

serving these various phenomena that we arrive 
at the discovery and the elucidation of their 
laws. 

Therefore it is most certain that those who 
attempt to establish a theory of Hypnotism, Mes¬ 
merism and Magnetism upon properties of mat¬ 
ter, or upon physiological views, and those who 
seek for it wholly in the faculties of the soul, 
or psychic mind strike equally far from the true 
theory. 

Mesmerism and Personal Magnetism is an em¬ 
anation from ourselves and directed by volition 
or an effort of the will, and partakes equally of 
the two substances, mind and matter, which 
composes our being, but of course this is not 
the place to enlarge upon or discuss this sub¬ 
ject. 

My only object or wish being to teach the sci¬ 
ence and art of Hypnotism, Mesmerism and 
Magnetism, and it is more to restrain than to ex¬ 
cite those who wish to study this science pro¬ 
foundly, that I have taken the liberty of laying 
down the proper route they should follow, and 
the difficulties they must surmount before they 
arrive at the proper solution or theory. 

Further details will be of no especial benefit 
to the student, therefore I will merely sum up 
in as brief a manner as possible what has been 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF HYPNOSIS. 165 


said in the preceding pages. That for the suc¬ 
cessful practice of Hypnotism, Mesmerism, Sug¬ 
gestive Therapeutics or Magnetic Healing all 
that is necessary is the proper mode of applica¬ 
tion, and confidence. 

All of the books which have been published, 
or theories which have been established since 
men have acknowledged it as a science, will add 
nothing essential to the theories or principles 
proclaimed in this work. What the student 
needs is a scientific knowledge of his psychic 
powers and the proper application of them, 

To examine into the causes and effects of the 
different psychic phenomena he must first have 
acquired by his own experience and observa¬ 
tion an entire conviction of the influence and 
effect of personal magnetism. 

Next he should acquire a general knowledge 
of natural law, then of the psychic organism of 
man, and its relation to the physical body, and 
the various conditions in which man is found to 
exist. Finally he must become acquainted with 
the effect and influence of the psychic 'mind upon 
organized matter, and keenly observe how one 
man acts upon and influences another by his 
will or mind. 

By following the principles and instructions 
contained in this book the physician or any per- 





i66 


HYPNOTISM. 


son of good phy leal health and of ordinary in¬ 
telligence can learn and practice Hypnotism, 
Mesmerism or Suggestive Therapeutics, either 
as a means of curing disease or giving demon¬ 
strations in Hypnotism or Mesmerism, which is 
always interesting and amusing. 

As system is essential to success in any busi¬ 
ness, so personal confidence on the part of the 
operator is absolutely essential to success in 
Hypnotism or Mesmerism. 

Confidence combined with earnestness and a 
desire to do good, will always bring success. 

Hypnotism and Mesmerism can and should be 
universally used by every one, but the author 
begs to accompany this statement with the warn¬ 
ing, which he always impresses upon his stu¬ 
dents, that action and reaction go Hand in hand, 
and if this mysterious power or influence is used 
for improper or evil purposes, it will sooner or 
later react with greater force upon the one using 
it, for— 

“Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein, and 
he that rolleth a stone, it shall return upon him.” 
—(Prov. 26:27.) 

It is sincerely hoped by the author, both for 
the sake of the science and the public good, that 
all who learn and realize the wonderful advant¬ 
age a Hypnotist has, will never take advantage 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF HYPNOSIS. 167 


or abuse the power he has had placed in his 
hands by a knowledge of the science of Hyp¬ 
notism and Mesmerism. 

Some of the results which have been described 
and seme of the statements which have been 
made in this work may seem so startling that 
the author can quite easily understand their be¬ 
ing received by some with a certain degree of 
suspicion. Indeed, in all' psychic phenomena the 
more enlightened and scientific minds will nat¬ 
urally demand at least to see demonstrations of 
these phenomena before they yield their absolute 
credence. However, it is not my intention or 
duty to convince any one, But only to record 
facts which I know from personal experience 
and observation to be true. 

Prof. L. W. DeLaurence. 









CHAPTER XXXIII. 


TREATMENT BY HYPNOTISM AND SUGGES¬ 
TION. 

z. Rheumatism.—2. Articular Rheumatism.—3. Men¬ 
orrhagia.—4. Paralysis Arm and Leg.—5. Habitual 
Drunkard.—6. Insomnia.—7. Chronic Rheumatism. 
—8. Aggravated Hysteria.—9. Cigarette Habit.— 
10. Moral Depravity.—n. Child Birth.—12. Stam¬ 
mering Cured by Hypnotism. 

In this chapter are given extracts of a few of 
the large number of cases successfully treated by 
Suggestive Therapeutics or Hypnotic Sugges¬ 
tion, by the author. 

CASE No. 1—Rheumatism, pains in the 
shoulder joints, arms and lower limbs for almost 
three years. 

James C. C., aged 47, an employe of iron mills, 
a man of good physique and had always enjoyed 
good health excepting one or two attacks of 
sciatica about two years before chronic rheuma¬ 
tism set in. 

At the time he came for treatment by Hypno¬ 
tic Suggestion, the pains were pronounced in 
169 


170 


HYPNOTISM. 


both shoulders, especially the left one, at the 
point where the collar bone articulates with the 
scapula. There was also a decided lameness just 
above the anterior superior spine of the ilium 
on the right side, and which was noticed most 
when stooping over or bending forward. 

The patient also suffered intense pains in both 
knees and ankle joints. After explaining the 
possibilities of treatment by Suggestion I pro¬ 
ceeded to induce sleep by the Mesmeric passes 
and suggestion. 

The patient soon fell into a deep, quiet sleep, 
and while in this condition was given reasonable 
but decided suggestions that he would feel an 
agreeable and warm influence passing all over 
his body, from my hands, which held both of 
his; that this influence would drive out all ache 
and pain from ffis diseased joints, and that when 
awakened he would have no pain whatever in 
any part of his body. 

After being awakened in the regular manner 
the pains in his knees and ankles were gone, as 
were also those in the back and shoulders. For 
months previous to the treatment by Suggestion 
the patient had been unable to walk without a 
cane, but could do so now with ease. 

Four days after he was again Hypnotized and 
given suggestions as before. The third treat- 


TREATMENT BY HYPNOTISM, 


171 


ment was given a few days later, and the last 
one in about a week, from which he awoke en¬ 
tirely cured^iand has remained so since. 

CASE No. 2—Articular rheumatism for seven 
months. Cured by Hypnotism and Suggestion 
inside of ten days. 

Miss Carrie S., aged 20. This young lady was 
brought to the hotel in a carriage while I was 
giving some demonstrations in a well known city 
in Canada, her parents having learned that re¬ 
lief possibly might be obtained for their daugh¬ 
ter by Suggestive treatment. 

It was necessary for the patient to be sup¬ 
ported by her parents from the carriage to the 
hotel parlor, she being weak and pale and quite 
unable to stand or walk alone, having had sev¬ 
eral severe attacks of hysteria. 

For some time before she had suffered greatly 
from sub-acute rheumatism, which had become 
gradually and steadily worse. 

Upon examination it was found that both 
wrists and finger joints were badly swollen and 
acutely painful upon pressure. The lower limbs 
were also swollen and very sensitive, with pain 
and inflammation at the ankles. The spine was 
decidedly affected, there also being present leu- 
corrhoea and amenorrhoea, the patient being 


172 


HYPNOTISM. 


troubled with nervousness and inability to sleep 
at night. 

The first induction of Hypnosis was entirely 
successful and the patient went into a deep sleep. 
Then the proper suggestions for relief and im¬ 
provement were given. After the second treat¬ 
ment, which she received upon the following day, 
the patient rested well at night, and had a decid¬ 
ed improvement in her appetite. 

The swelling at the "joints had almost entirely 
disappeared, there being only a slight soreness 
present on pressure. 

Two days later she was again Hypnotized and 
suggestions given that she would awake free 
from pain and feel greatly strengthened in mind 
and body, and that she would not feel any more 
pain. 

She was Hypnotized twice afterwards and be¬ 
came completely well and cured of all undesir¬ 
able symptoms, and was able to walk or ride 
her wheel without fatigue or pain, and alto¬ 
gether seemed like a changed young lady both 
in mind and body. 

CASE No. 3—Menorrhagia every twelve or 
fifteen days’ time extended to four weeks and 
eventually cured. 

Mrs. W., aged 30, mother of two children, the 


TREATMENT BY HYPNOTISM. 


1 73 


youngest being four years old. Hysterical and 
of poor constitution. Previous to her first preg¬ 
nancy the period had been regular every four 
weeks, but for the last three years it had returned 
about every twelve or fifteen days, and some¬ 
times, if worried or overworked, at shorter in¬ 
tervals. 

The flow being very copious and accompanied 
by pain in the spine and at the base of the brain. 
During the first treatment she readily entered 
into a deep degree of sleep, then decided sug¬ 
gestions were given that she would gradually 
improve in health and mind, and that the next 
period would not come on until four weeks, and 
that the flow would only be of three days' dura¬ 
tion, and positively would be unaccompanied by 
any pain or anxiety. 

The treatment was given immediately after her 
last period. Fifteen days later she felt premoni¬ 
tory symptoms of its return. She was again 
Hypnotized and by suggestion these symptoms 
and pains were made to pass off, and by sug¬ 
gestion, repeated every four days, the period was 
retarded until the four weeks were up. The flow 
lasted three days, was unattended by any pain 
and less copious than usual. 

Her next treatment was given three days after 
the period had ceased and suggestions given that 





174 


HYPNOTISM. 


the next period would not come on until four 
weeks from the last, and henceforth every four 
weeks. 

It did not appear again until four weeks from 
the last, and as the previous period, was free 
from pain and lasted about three days. 

The treatment was continued every nine days 
for three months, at the end of which time the 
function was thoroughly regulated, and occurred 
every twenty-seven or eight days, unattended 
by pain or other abnormal condit^n. ^ % 

During the treatment other n^rvous ;V disorckrs 
and minor symptoms with which the patietfHf&I i|,r 
been troubled disappeared. 

CASE No. 4—Paralysis of the right arm and 
leg. 

J. H., aged 40, was a well-built man, with an 
originally strong constitution, being a black¬ 
smith by trade. 

The first symptoms appeared about two years 
ago. Fourteen months later he suddenly lost all 
power of his right arm and leg. 

At the time he consulted me he was suffering 
from severe pains in the neck and right shoul¬ 
der, which had been present about five weeks. 
This pain prevented him securing more than two 
or three hours sleep at night. The trouble was 





TREATMENT BY HYPNOTISM., 175 

of syphilitic origin, but anti-syphilitic treatment 
had produced no desirable effect for some time. 

The patient was neither able to raise his arm 
or foot, or extend his fingers, seeming to have 
no control over the afflicted members. 

He was Mesmerized by the use of passes and 
suggestion, a deep stage of Hypnosis being in¬ 
duced. Then suggestions were given for the re¬ 
lief of the pain, and the rigidity of the paralyzed 
limbs were relaxed by favorable suggestions, 
aad active movements of the arm and leg. 

That the patient would feel a sense of warmth 
passing down through his paralyzed limbs, that 
when he awoke the pain would be greatly less¬ 
ened, and that upon retiring he would immedi¬ 
ately go into a sound sleep and have a good 
night's rest. 

Upon awakening the pain in his neck and 
shoulder was found to be greatly relieved, and 
that night he, for the first time in months, slept 
soundly. 

The patient was Hypnotized twice a week for 
two months. Two weeks after the treatment was 
begun all pain had disappeared and he was able 
to sleep from seven to nine hours every night. 

During Hypnosis artificial movements of the 
arm and leg were employed and in time the pa¬ 
tient could move them himself when suggestions 





176 


HYPNOTISM. 


were given him to do so, and the power of life 
and vital forces gradually returned to the limbs, 
so that at the end of four weeks the man could 
open and close his hand, and raise his arm on 
a level with the shoulder, retaining it in this hor¬ 
izontal position for a short time. 

The treatments were continued and after eight 
weeks he could move his arm and Hand at will, 
and could walk with ease, his right limb being 
strong enough to support his body. 

CASE No. 5—Habitual drunkard. 

H. B., tailor by occupation, a man 30 years of 
age, and an expert workman, but for seven years 
drank whiskey to excess, which had brought on 
several attacks of delirium tremens, so that his 
mind or mental forces had greatly deteriorated. 

The desire for strong drink had so overcome 
his will power that he had absolutely no resist¬ 
ance left. 

After being Hypnotized he was given sugges¬ 
tions that he would have a decided abhorrence 
for whiskey, and that even the smell of it would 
disgust and sicken him; that when he awoke he 
would have his power of mind and will greatly 
increased and strengthened and would once 
more know and realize that he was possessed of 


TREATMENT BY HYPNOTISM. 


17 ? 


manhood enough to keep from disgracing him¬ 
self and family. 

He was further induced to give a. solemn 
pledge that he would drink no more whiskey or 
stimulants. He was given suggestions of this 
nature daily for a week, then twice a week for 
two weeks, then once a week for a month. And 
after that no suggestions were necessary. 

After the first Hypnosis he did not take a 
drink of whiskey or alcoholic liquor of any kind, 
although it was offered him several different 
times. 

Four weeks after the treatment began he was 
given employment by one of his former employ¬ 
ers who had discharged him for drinking. This 
act greatly encouraged and strengthened his in¬ 
tention to again be a man, and there is scarcely 
any question but what he will always be able to 
lead a temperate life. 

CASE No. 6—Insomnia. 

M. D., a dentist, aged about 40 years, whose 
general health had become badly affected because 
of an inability to sleep. His sleeplessness dated 
from a severe accident, Ke being thrown from a 
buggy during a runaway, having his head badly 
injured. He was a man of exceptional intelli- 



i 7 » 


HYPNOTISM. 


gence, and the want of sleep had brought on 
decided nervous depression and dyspepsia. 

At whatever time he retired he was unable to 
go to sleep and would roll and toss about until 
his efforts to sleep almost drove him frantic, and 
would scarcely ever secure over an hour’s trou¬ 
bled rest during the night, rising in the morning 
weak and nervous. 

He was quite easily put to sleep, and highly 
susceptible to suggestion, any part of his body 
becoming cataleptic by suggestion. 

After getting him perfectly under control I 
gave suggestions that as soon as he went to bed 
that night he would close his eyes and feel a 
sleepy, drowsy sensation creeping all over his 
body, that every nerve and muscle would be 
resting perfectly quiet, and that he would go 
sound asleep and not wake up until morning. 

These suggestions were repeated several times. 
The next day he reported having had the first 
good night’s sleep since the accident. 

The treatment was continued every second 
day for two weeks, which completed the course. 
Since that time he has continued to sleep well at 
night. His mind and health have also improved 
to a corresponding degree. 

This case is one of special interest, as this 


TREATMENT BY HYPNOTISM. 


179 


morbid habit of long standing was successfully 
cured in about two weeks by Suggestion. 

CASE No. 7—Chronic rheumatism. 

Lucy H., aged 27, was sent to me to be cured. 
She was suffering from rheumatism in both 
shoulders and arms. It had troubled her for 
over a year, causing great pain when she moved 
her arms, so that she could not comb her hair 
or dress herself. The lameness had come on 
gradually and had resisted all previous attempts 
to cure it. 

She readily entered a deep stage of Hypnosis, 
and while in that state I gave suggestions that 
all pain and lameness was leaving her body, and 
that when she awoke she would be free from 
pain and again have use of her arms and hands. 

Her arms were also rubbed and passes made 
downward while the suggestions were being 
given. Upon awakening she seemed to have 
better use of her arms but had some slight pain 
left in the shoulder. 

Three days later she was again put to sleep, 
this time during Hypnosis I gave her a broom 
and made her sweep the floor, suggesting that 
she had no pain whatever in her arms. She 
handled the broom with ease, then after giving 
suggestion that she would be entirely free from 


i8o 


HYPNOTISM. 


pain I aroused her, no pain being* present. She 
remained under treatment for two weeks, and at 
the end of that time returned to her work as a 
domestic, absolutely free of pain. 

CASE No. 8—Aggravated hysteria of over 
five years standing cured by Hypnotism and 
Suggestion in six weeks. 

Mrs. W., aged 34, mother of two children. A 
woman of good constitution and lively but ner¬ 
vous temperament. She had never noticed any 
symptoms of hysteria until about five years ago. 

After the first few attacks they increased in 
frequency and were more severe. They occurred 
about every three weeks and were accompanied 
by a depressed condition of mind, and by a sense 
of constriction at the throat. These premonitory 
symptoms were followed by fretful crying spells 
which usually lasted about a day. 

Following this came general muscular tremors 
which increased to strong convulsive move¬ 
ments, alternating with decided rigidity of the 
whole body. 

The attack lasted from fifteen to forty minutes, 
and after passing off would leave the patient 
weak and exhausted. Sometimes she would have 
five or six spells, as they term^ *hem, in twenty- 
four hours. 


TREATMENT BY HYPNOTISM. 181 

At the first induction of Hypnotism she fell 
into a light nervous sleep. After giving sugges¬ 
tions to quiet her mind, she entered into a pro¬ 
found sleep. Then she was given suggestions 
that there would not be a return of the spells, 
that she would enjoy a more cheerful condition 
of mind and would not think or worry about 
their return, that every day her nervous system 
would grow stronger and that she would know 
and realize that they would not return again. 

At the end of six weeks she was completely 
cured and has remained free from hysteria ever 
since. 

CASE No. 9—Cigarette habit cured. 

Charlie M., a young man of 20, was sent to me 
to be cured of the cigarette habit. He was the 
son of a prominent railroad official, and had 
smoked cigarettes continuously for about three 
years. His father had tried to break him of the 
habit, and the young man had made frequent at¬ 
tempts himself, but had relapsed each time, the 
intense desire to smoke being so great that he 
could not resist it. When he came for treat¬ 
ment he was in a highly nervous condition, pal¬ 
pitation of the heart being present, as was also 
mental irritability, dyspepsia and catarrh, all due 





182 


HYPNOTISM. 


to the large number of cigarettes he had been 
in the habit of smoking. 

I first proceeded to fasten his hands together 
in the regular way, then quickly threw him into • 
a deep stage of Hypnosis, and by suggestion 
placed his mind in a quiet receptive condition, 
telling him to listen very carefully to every word 
I said to him. I then stated to him that when 
he woke up he would have entirely ceased to 
care for cigarettes, that he would become dis¬ 
gusted at the sight of one, and that the odor 
from them would be so obnoxious and offensive 
to him that he would rather take a snake in his 
hand than touch another cigarette. 

I then induced somnambulism, and while in 
this state offered him a cigarette. He absolutely 
refused to take one, and when I slipped a box of 
them in his coat pocket he instantly threw them 
on the floor, saying he would rather have a snake 
in his pocket than those horrible things. 

I then stated to him that as long as he lived 
he would never have anything but disgust and 
contempt for cigarettes. These suggestions were 
repeated every afternoon for two weeks. Also 
other suggestions were given in regard to the 
improvement of his general health. From the 
first treatment the young man could not be in- 



TREATMENT BY HYPNOTISM. 183 

duced to touch or smoke another cigarette, so 
complete was his dislike for them. 

His health improved very rapidly and today he 
is entirely free from any symptoms of cigarette 
smoking or desire for them. 

CASE No. 10—Moral depravity of long 
standing cured by Hypnotism and Suggestion. 

S. L., a young man of 22, sent to me to be 
Hypnotized and treated by Suggestion, by a well 
known physician, a friend of mine, who had con¬ 
siderable knowledge as to the possibilities of 
Hypnotism, and knew that morbid habits of this 
nature require psychical treatment, as all ordi¬ 
nary treatment, either medical or surgical, fail 
to cure these vices. 

Psychology teaches us that these perverted 
sexual instincts are the result of an hereditary 
or acquired morbid condition of the mind, and 
constitute, strictly speaking, a psychical disease. 
And require for their cure psychic treatment 
(Hypnotic Suggestion), which entirely changes 
the diseased mental condition or depraved desire 
to practice masturbation, the mind being 
strengthened and reinforced by Suggestion dur¬ 
ing Hypnosis. 

If Hypnotism and Suggestion has done noth¬ 
ing more for mankind than to bring these de- 






HYPNOTISM. 


i <4 

plorable cases, which contaminate many young 
men and women of today, within the scope of 
curative treatment, it most certainly has con¬ 
ferred a great blessing and lasting benefit upon 
misguided humanity, as they are far more prev¬ 
alent than is generally supposed outside of the 
medical profession and insane asylum. 

This young man who had practiced this de¬ 
moralizing and private vice since early man¬ 
hood, and which had brought him to a deplora¬ 
ble mental and physical condition, verging on 
insanity, was without special effort placed under 
the influence of Hypnotism. Suggestions (de¬ 
cided) were then given to change his condition 
of mind and bring him face to face with a full 
realization of his acts, and what they would ulti¬ 
mately bring him to. And to remove this inhu¬ 
man desire, greatly increasing will power and 
self-control. He came every other day for treat¬ 
ment and at the expiration of two weeks all in¬ 
fluence and desire of the habit had disappeared. 

For success in these cases it is essential for 
the physician or operator to secure the patient T s 
confidence, letting him understand that you are 
and will take a personal interest in his welfare 
and good. 

And that you wish him to unite and enter into 


TREATMENT BY HYPNOTISM. 185 

a common effort with you for the betterment of 
his condition and health. 

These patients should be closely watched, for 
they are notoriously given to deception. But one 
can secure their confidence by careful, judicious 
management, and then they are saved the danger 
of permitting “the wish to be father to the 
thought, or desire.” 

They fully realize their utter helplessness and 
gladly welcome any encouraging word or helping 
hand, if properly presented. 

CASE No. 11—Child birth. 

Mrs. B., aged 24. In this case I was called to 
use Hypnotism and Suggestion at the wish of 
the patient, who had been in labor for twenty- 
eight hours. 

The labor pains had ceased and she was suffer¬ 
ing a continuous pain; being almost completely 
exhausted when I arrived. 

The head was upon the perineum, and still in 
the pelvis, having remained there for over two 
hours without any change or advance. I se¬ 
cured the patient's attention and quickly in¬ 
duced Hypnosis; gave suggestions to remove the 
pain and all sense of fatigue. 

Then I told her the labor was prolonged and 
due to certain causes, that she would know and 




HYPNOTISM. 


186 

realize that the child was being born and would 
be conscious of everything that was done, but 
would not suffer or feel any pain, and that she 
would remain quiet and calm as possible, and 
not struggle or worry. 

I then told her to close her eyes and bear 
down hard when told to do so. The physician 
then proceeded and with the use of forceps 
brought the head through the pelvis. Then she 
was given suggestion to bear down hard, but 
that no pain whatever would be felt. 

The child was delivered painlessly, as was the 
placenta. After being brought out from the 
influence of Suggestion the mother stated that 
she had felt no pain and was well pleased that 
she had been saved a great amount of suffering. 

CASE No. 12—Stammering cured by Hypno¬ 
tic Suggestion. 

L. S., aged 22. This young man had been all 
through his life unable to speak a word without 
stammering or hesitating. He had been sent by 
his parents to different institutions to be cured, 
but returned each time very little improved, and 
would shortly relapse into his old way and stam¬ 
mer about every word he attempted to speak. 

At the second induction of Hypnosis a deep 
stage was obtained. Then he was given sugges- 



TREATMENT BY HYPNOTISM. 187 

tions that his affliction was not due to any abnor¬ 
mal condition of the vocal organs but was the 
result of an actual condition of his mind, and 
that when this impression was removed he could 
and would speak without stammering. 

Somnambulism was then induced and decided 
and convincing suggestions were given that he 
would not stammer or hesitate when he spoke. 
That he would know and realize in his own mind 
that he had the ability and power to speak his 
words without hesitating, that he now would 
have confidence in himself, and that when he 
approached a person he would talk to him with¬ 
out becoming confused or losing self-control; 
and that when he attempted to converse over the 
'phone he would do so without confusion. 

He was engaged in ordinary conversation after 
these suggestions had been given him and was 
able to speak and pronounce certain words which 
he had always hesitated over, such words, for in¬ 
stance, as those beginning with s and f. 

Then while in this condition he was sent to a 
telephone and, calling up a lady friend, he talked 
to her by wire, a thing he had never been able 
to do before. 

Decided Post-Hypnotic Suggestions were 
then given in regard to the morrow and at all 
future time he would and could speak without 





i88 


HYPNOTISM. 


stammering, and that he would find a wonderful 
improvement in his speech. That all words be¬ 
ginning with" s and f would be found quite easy 
for him to pronounce. 

Treatment was given daily in this case for three 
weeks, with an encouraging improvement from 
the first induction of Hypnosis. At the end of 
this time the young man was able to speak flu¬ 
ently and greatly surprised his parents and ac¬ 
quaintances by his being cured of stammering 


THE END.