Are you ready to be hypnotized? All hypnosis is self-hypnosis. If you follow my simple instructions, no power on earth can keep you from being hypnotized.

You can resist if you want to, but that is not why you are here. Just follow my simple instructions, and you are about to enjoy a very pleasant, relaxing experience. Rest your arms limply on your thighs like this. Now, I want you to look up at my hand, and fix your eyes on my little finger. I will soon ask you to take a long, deep breath, and to hold it for a few seconds. I will then pass my hand down in front of your eyes at which time you will begin to release your breath, as you keep your eyes fixed on my little finger.

As I pass my hand down, that will cause your eyelids to close down. Now, take a long, deep breath, and hold it for a moment.

I'm now passing my hand down in front of your eyes, and as I do, let your eyelids close down, and let go of the surface tension in your body. Just let your body relax as much as possible right now. Now, place your awareness on your eye muscles, and relax every muscle and nerve in and around your eyes, to the point that they just won't work. When you're sure they're so relaxed that as long as you hold onto this relaxation, they just won't work, I want you to hold on to that relaxation and test them, to make sure they won't work. All right, that's fine. Now stop trying and just relax, go deeper now, with each and every breath you exhale go deeper relaxed. Now, this relaxation you have in your eyes is the same quality of relaxation that I want you to have throughout your whole body.

So just let this quality of relaxation flow through your whole body from the top of your head to the tips of your toes. Now, we can deepen this relaxation much more. In a moment, I'm going to have you open and close your eyes. When you close your eyes, that's your signal to let this feeling of relaxation become deeper. All you have to do is want it to happen and you can make it happen very easily. OK, now, open your eyes. Use your wonderful imagination and imagine your whole body is covered and wrapped in a warm blanket of relaxation.

Now, we can deepen this relaxation much more. In a moment, I'm going to have you open and close your eyes one more time. Again, when you close your eyes, double the relaxation you now have. Make it become twice as deep. OK, now once more, open your eyes. Let every muscle in your body become so relaxed that as long as you hold onto this quality of relaxation, every muscle of your body will not work. In a moment, I'm going to have you open and close your eyes one more time. Again, when you close your eyes, double the relaxation you now have. Make it become twice as deep. OK, now, once more, open your eyes. Let every muscle in your body become so relaxed that as long as you hold onto this quality of relaxation, every muscle of your body will not work. In a moment, I'm going to lift your right hand by the wrist and drop it.

If you have followed my instructions up to this point, that hand will be so relaxed, it will be just as loose and limp as a wet dish cloth, and will simply plop down. Once your hand touches your body, I want you to send a wave of relaxation from the top of your head down to the tip of your toes. I will now lift your right hand. Just let it hang and plop down as I let go.

Now, we'll do that again with your left hand. When I lift up your hand, just allow it to hang freely, as loose and limp as wet dish cloth and plop down as I let go. When it touches your body, send another wave of relaxation from the top of your head to the tip of your toes, and double your present level of relaxation. I will now lift your left hand. Just let it hang and plop down as I let go.

Now, that's complete physical relaxation.

I want you to know that there are two ways a person can relax. You can relax physically, and you can relax mentally. You already proved that you can relax physically. Now let me show you how to relax mentally.
