To prepare yourself for this enjoyable, helpful experience, be sure you have all tight clothes loosened, and then get yourself in just as comfortable a position as you can... Now close your eyes and inhale deeply and hold it for three or four seconds and then exhale slowly.

Again breathe in deeply and exhale slowly... keep doing that 5 or 6 more times...

As you inhale, you bring more oxygen into your body, and as you exhale it causes your body to keep relaxing more and more.

Now you can continue breathing easily and freely, and can feel yourself becoming more calm and peaceful...

You are revealing signs that indicate you are moving into a very deep, peaceful state of relaxation... as I continue talking to you, you can keep relaxing more peacefully... not caring how deeply you relax, just happy to continue becoming more calm, more peaceful, and more at ease... continuing to breathe easily and freely...

Your subconscious mind will always be aware of what I'm saying to you, so it keeps becoming less and less important for you to consciously listen to my voice...

Your subconscious mind, and all levels of your inner mind can hear and receive everything I tell you, and your conscious mind can relax completely...

You are continuing to experience perfect peace of mind, and can feel yourself moving into the situation I describe to you... it's going to happen automatically, and you don't even need to think about it consciously...

Now I want you to imagine yourself lying in a comfortable position near a stream of fresh, clear water, in a beautiful forest on a perfect summer day...

There is a warm, gentle breeze, and the air is fresh and clean, the sound of the peaceful stream is very relaxing...

It keeps becoming less important for you to consciously listen to my voice because your subconscious mind and all levels of your inner mind are hearing and receiving everything I say...

In your mind, you are enjoying the beauty of nature, as the sunlight shines through the trees and you listen to the gentle flow of water and the birds singing cheerfully...

You are lying there, comfortably relaxing... it is so peaceful that you continue feeling more relaxed than ever before in your entire life...

As you continue enjoying this peaceful, pleasant experience, a soothing drowsiness is coming over your whole body, from the top of your head to the bottom of your feet...

You continue feeling calmer, more relaxed and more secure...

And now, as you lie there with your eyes closed, you are so relaxed and comfortable and happy that you continue moving into a more peaceful, more detached state...

It may seem like you are drifting into a state of sleep...

There may be times when it seems like my voice is a long distance away... and there may be times, when I'm talking to you, that you will not be consciously aware of my voice, and that's okay, because your subconscious mind is still receiving every word I say, and is making true everything I tell you...

From now on you will be influenced only by positive thoughts, ideas and feelings...

The following thoughts come to you... I am calm, secure, and relaxed... I am comfortable and at ease... I am in control of myself at all times... I am responsible for my body, and will always treat my body well... my mind enables me to be relaxed and calm as I go about the activities of my daily life...
