Just sit and relax. Do you have a good imagination? In other words, can you close your eyes and imagine a scene, visualize a scene and see it in front of your eyes? Good.

Let's test your imagination in a few ways. I'll describe what I want you to visualize and then after you close your eyes and you visualize it, I'll ask you a few questions about what you see.

Do you drive a car? Alright, close your eyelids down and imagine you're standing in front of your car. Now when you see it very clearly, just nod your head.

Fine, now your looking at your car, what color is it? Good.

Open the door of the car and get in behind the wheel. Now look straight ahead. Is the speedometer in the center or to your right or to your left? Is the speedometer circular, semi-circular, horizontal or vertical? Alright, what color is the needle that indicates the speed on the speedometer?

Alright, fine. Open your eyes. Could you see all that clearly?

Now lets test your imagination in another way. We learned a couple of things about your imagination right then. This time when you close your eyelids right down, imagine your at a swimming place, a beach, a pool, a lake or at the ocean. Close your eyelids down.

Now I want you to imagine that you're at a swimming place. When you see the scene clearly in your minds eye, nod your head. Alright, fine.

Now look around you at this place and tell me what you see. Do you see any people there?

That's very good, open your eyes. Could you see all that clearly as a mental picture? That showed that you have a good imagination to create, because in that instance I asked you something where you had to create the scenes in the picture.

Now we'll go to the other extreme and find out how well you can imagine a simple, single object. This time when you close your eyelids down, imagine that you're looking at a full moon.

Close your eyelids down. Now then I want you to imagine that you are either seated outside or in a car, or at the beach, or maybe looking out your bedroom window. Its night time and you're looking up at a full moon.

To help you to see the full moon, I want you to now to roll your eyeballs back up, with you eyelids remaining closed down. Roll your eyeballs backup in your head as if you could see the full moon right up here backup in the center of your forehead.

Roll your eyeballs way back up in your head and as you do your eyelids lock tightly closed the more you try to open them the tighter they are locking closed try now to open your eyelids they're locking tighter and tighter, now stop trying, just relax and sleep.

Let a good and pleasant feeling now come all over your body. Let every muscle and nerve in your body go limp and loose. Breathe easily and deeply and send a wave of deep relaxation from the top of your head to the tips of your toes.
