POWER 
MEDITATION 


BERSERKER 


BOOKS 


Preface 


The foundation of Spiritual Satanism is Power meditation. Satanism is based 
upon the true transformation of the soul through power meditation. Through 
power meditation, we work to complete our Creator Satan's unfinished work on 
humanity, that of reaching the godhead. The greatest working of meditation is the 
complete transformation of the human soul; the Magnum Opus, that is the 
underlying message of nearly all legends of the Gods, and the occult. The 
Magnum Opus is reaching physical and spiritual perfection and becoming 
immortal as are the Gods. Satan was prevented from finishing his work on 
humanity. Spiritual Satanism is all about completing this work. 


Christianity was invented to remove spiritual and occult knowledge from the 
populace and place this power in the hands of a "chosen" few to the detriment of 
all humanity. The powers of the mind and soul are very real. People who are 
unaware of or who do not believe in these powers are easy to control and 
manipulate by those who are skilled in using these energies. 


The serpent, a symbol of Satan represents the fiery kundalini force coiled at the 
base of the spine, which upon ascending, transforms the human mind and soul to 
a much higher level of understanding and ability. This is the true meaning of 
"Raising the Devil." The Serpent symbol of Satan also represents the DNA helix 
of life. 

The Original Gods [Demons] were unjustly labeled as monsters and branded as 
"evil" to keep humanity from spiritual knowledge. Because of this, the human 
race has drastically degenerated both spiritually and intellectually. 


Magick, sorcery, spells, witchcraft, etc., are all powers of the mind. The success 
of any working depends upon the strength and power of the operator's mind, 
aura, mental concentration, and his/her ability to sense and direct energy. 
Understanding energy, discerning between different energies, invoking, evoking, 
and directing energy is the foundation of all "magick." This comes through power 
meditation. How diligently and consistently one applies one's self to a program of 
power meditation will determine how powerful one's workings are. 


Satanic Power Meditation, Volume | instructs in the foundations for beginning 
meditation, reveals the structure, functions and powers of the human soul and 
the effects of power meditation on the human soul and mind. 


Satanic Power Meditation Volume One 


© Copyright 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007 Joy of Satan Ministries; 
Library of Congress Number: 12-16457 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PART | 

THE HUMAN SOUL 5 
Satanism and Kundalini 7 
The Fourth Dimension 11 
Physics of the Soul 13 
Occult Power in the Brain 15 
Aspects of the Soul 17 
The Chakras 19 
Opening the Chakras 25 
Opening the Third Eye 27 
The Third Eye 29 
Opening the Sixth Chakra 30 
Opening the Crown Chakra 31 
Opening the Throat chakra 33 
Opening the Heart chakra 35 
Opening the Solar Plexus Chakra 37 
Opening the Sacral Chakra 39 
Opening the Base Chakra 41 
Opening the 8" and 9" Chakras 43 
Opening and Aligning the 

10" and 11" Temple Chakras 45 
Opening and Aligning the 

12" and 13" Hip Chakras 45 
Opening the Hand Chakras 47 
Opening the Feet Chakras 49 
Correct Chakra Alignment 51 
Opening the Clairaudience Chakras 55 
Opening the Astral Eyes Chakras 57 
PART II 

FOUNDATION MEDITATIONS 59 
Satanism and Power Meditation 61 
Basic Meditation Program 63 
Preparing the Mind for Meditation 65 
Trance 67 
Brainwaves 69 


Foundation Meditation 
Energy Meditation 

How to Clean Your Aura 
Satanic Void Meditation 

EZ Chakra Spin 

The Full Chakra Meditation 
Sound Meditation 

Directing Energy from Azazel 
How to Close your Chakras 
Flame Meditation 

Breathing Exercises for Satanists 


Part | 
The Human Soul 


Satanism and Kundalini 
Bioelectricity, what it is and what it does: 


Bioelectricity is also known as the life force, the chi, the body electric, prana, the 
aura, the spirit, witch power, etc. There are many different names for this energy. 


Our bodies run on bioelectricity. Thoughts are electrical impulses in the brain. 
The brain runs on bioelectricity. When this electricity becomes imbalanced, one 
has seizures. 

The amount of bioelectricity an individual has, determines the degree of their 
physical, psychological and spiritual health. People, who are ill or depressed, 
have lesser amounts of bioelectricity. Depression all by itself, is a symptom of too 
little bioelectricity. 

Bioelectricity increases our energy, our immunity to disease, our charisma, instills 
a positive outlook, and strengthens our thought power. With increased 
bioelectricity, our thoughts (electrical impulses) become stronger and are more 
able to manifest themselves in reality. 


Some examples of bioelectricity include: 


> Buddhist monks, who sat motionless in the street, (protesters), were 
soaked with gasoline and lit on fire. They continued to sit still and burn to 
death. 


> Martial artists: busting through concrete with their fists, knife hand "karate 
chop," enduring major, crushing, and lethal blows, unharmed. 


> Dim Mak: the deadly martial art of inflicting light specific blows to chi (a 
variation of bioelectricity) meridians (acupressure points of bioelectric 
energy flow) during specific times that can cause delayed death, 
sometimes up to five months later. 


> When the mind, through fear, panics, or when one is in a life and death 
situation, this sometimes enables an individual to lift extremely heavy 
objects, for example, back end of a car, that under normal conditions, 
would be impossible. 

>» Telekinesis- The ability to move objects with the mind 


>» Pyrokinesis- The ability to set things on fire with the mind 


>» Electrokinesis- The ability to control objects, such as computers that run 
on electricity 


>» Levitation- Some martial arts and yoga masters have the ability to levitate 
their bodies into the air. 


The strength of one’s bioelectricity is the foundation of all magickal success. Old 
spells with strange ingredients have little or nothing to do with the success of a 
magickal working, the success depends upon the strength of the mind and the 
aura (the bioelectrical field) that with proper focus and direction, will affect one's 
environment and others. 


Those known as the Gods (very powerful and advanced extra-terrestrials who 
have genetically modified their DNA so they do not age), have much of this very 
energy. Lucifer is known as "the shining one." Many of these Gods "known as 
Demons" are radiant with this very energy. The hieroglyphs on the walls in the 
Egyptian temples, tombs and inside the Egyptian Pyramids explain how 
important this energy is in becoming a God. 


Reaching true Godhead is difficult and requires consistent hard work and 
dedication. Mastery of the mind is essential. The spirit, as long as you are alive, 
is a part of the physical self. Yes, many of us can astral project (leave our bodies 
at will), BUT, the physical self acts to empower the soul as long as we are alive. 
My experience with the dead is they do not evolve in power any more, beyond 
what they had when they were alive. A spirit remains a spirit until they 
reincarnate physically. Only through the strength of the soul (powerful 
bioelectricity), will one ascend into godhood. 


Kundalini and the chakras: 


Kundalini is the highest form of yoga. It is a god thing. All of the tenets of Yoga, 
Buddhism, Hinduism, etc., and the western religions, preach helplessness, 
instruct one on how to be a total victim, and try to make sure the results obtained 
from these disciplines are kept under strict control, if obtained at all. Sacred 
writings (“Hiero” means "Holy" and “glyph” means "symbol”) left for us in Egypt 
(one of the original centers of True Satanism) are instructions for becoming a 
god. 


The objective of mainstream religions, both east and west, is to keep humanity 
enslaved and powerless. These religions use fear is used as a tool. "Karma" this, 
and “Karma" that. Satanism does not preach helplessness. Satan is brilliant, 
fearless, incredibly strong, and defiant. He rebels against limitations placed upon 
freedom. 


The Chakras 
There are seven major chakras located along the spine that are the most 


powerful. Six smaller, but equally powerful chakras are located on each side of 
the hips, shoulders, and the temples behind the eyes on the sides of the head. 


The most powerful of these are the shoulder chakras. Chakras function to 
empower the soul with energy. These thirteen chakras are essential to life. No 
one can live without them. 

The seven chakras along the spine are the "seven seals," written about in the 
Christian bible book of “Revelation.” These are "The seven lamps of fire that burn 
before the throne of God." In many grimoires and ancient texts, the code word for 
"chakra/s" is "God/s." For example, references to certain "words of power" that 
"command the gods." "God" is also a code word for one's self. 


The authors of Judeo/Christian Bible perverted and corrupted all spiritual 
knowledge in attempts to systematically remove all of this from the populace. 
This knowledge has been kept in and exploited by a "chosen" few to the 
detriment of humanity. 


The "Tree of ald predates Judeo/Christianity by thousands of years. The "Tree 
of Life" is actually a map of the human soul. The trunk 
symbolizes the spine and the branches represent the 

144, 000 nadis that circulate the chi/witchpower. The serpent 
seen in the caduceus used both by the American Medical 
Association and in Veterinary medicine represents the 
kundalini force. Unfortunately, this most sacred symbol which 
represents healing at all levels has been heinously 
blasphemed and corrupted by Judeo/Christianity. 


They are also referred to as "seals" because the enemy 
aliens sealed them in humanity to prevent our acquisition of 
godly power and knowledge. We have been cut off from 
spirituality and the astral world. Thousands of years ago, we 
were as the Gods, until the earth was attacked and there was 
“war in heaven.” Our being sealed has caused the human race to degenerate. 
Imbalances in this energy and blockages, along with holes in the aura cause 
drug and alcohol addiction, depression, a lack of concern for the feelings of 
others and other forms of life, abusive behavior and many other things that 
plague humanity. 


Kundalini 


The SERPENT OF FIRE is the symbol of kundalini. It lies dormant, coiled at the 
base of the spine, beneath the Muladhara chakra. The objective is to ascend the 
serpent (powerhouse of energy) from the base of the spine, through all the seven 
chakras and out through the crown chakra at the top of the head. In order to do 
this safely, all seven chakras must be completely open and unobstructed. 


In order to handle a large amount of bioelectricity safely, one's body must be 
strong and all of the seven chakras must be fully open. 


Kundalini is the life force and is very sexual in nature. This is the reason the 
Christian church and other RHP religions ban masturbation and all forms of sex. 
Sex is the creative power; it is one’s use of the life force to create another human 
being. When one is trained and adept, the use of this force can be applied to 
many other objectives. 


Hatha (physical) yoga can be a big help in stimulating and opening the chakras 
and very recommended. By increasing our level of physical flexibility, the life 
force flows easier. One only needs to look at the stiffness of old age and the ill 
health that accompanies it, old age precedes death. 


There are many different methods of awakening this power. Some of these 
include: 


> Chanting- Vibration is very powerful. The power of sound can break glass, 
weaken steel, and cement structures. Vibrations cause the chakras to 
open and stimulate the kundalini at the base of the spine. 


> Controlled Breathing (pranyama) - Different methods of controlled 
breathing are specific to each chakra. We are all aware how important the 
breath is to the life force. The Egyptian God Thoth has said many times 
"Life is in the Breath." 


>» Visualization and concentration- Through visualizing and focusing our 
minds on each chakra, we can open, close, and control them. 


> Revamping the bioelectricity ideally, should be done slowly and gradually. 
One’s physical and spiritual self is accustomed to operating on a certain 
voltage of bioelectricity. 


Increased Bioelectricity: 


> Can induce intense bliss. 

Strengthens and intensifies the aura. 

> Gives a feeling of lightness, floating, glowing and assists in astral 
projection (where one wills one's soul to leave one's body and return 
safely). 

> Opens one's mind for spirit contact and telepathic communication. Will 
enable one to resist disease and also provide the power to heal one's self. 

> Protects the immune system. 

>» Provides the power to work magick- true magick without props- empty 
handed. This is the art of the true adept. Ceremony is unnecessary. 


iN 


LIMITATIONS ARE NOT A PART OF SATANISM. 


10 


The Fourth Dimension 


The Fourth dimension is what we experience when we astral project, enter a 
portal to another time, or experience in an altered state. It is also a level of being 
in that with a powerful mind and soul, what we think or desire for better or worse 
often comes to pass, so it is important to maintain a positive frame of mind and 
control our thoughts. 


When someone breaks a limb, the limb is placed in a cast. When the cast is 
removed, the limb is withered, shriveled, and needs rehabilitation in order to 
retain its former range of movement and strength. 


Meditation opens a part of our mind that is defunct. Centuries of xian religious 
control have made most of us unaware of the fourth dimension, both psychically 
and scientifically. As humans, we can only see a small portion of the 
electromagnetic spectrum. Insects can see ultraviolet light. Certain animals can 
sense many things that a human cannot. Just because someone cannot see or 
hear something, that does not mean it doesn't exist, as with ultraviolet light, X- 
rays, gamma rays and other forms of energy. 


When we open our minds, it takes time for us to adjust. | have had a lifetime of 
being psychic. Even though | was an atheist, | always had another sense, though 
| tuned out the spirit world. In coming to Satan, the so-called supernatural 
increased 100 fold in my life. What is a typical day to many of us would 
completely freak out the average person. The supernatural becomes a part of our 
everyday life. 

Hearing voices and seeing things are the most common manifestation of opening 
up our minds. This will pass eventually and come under control. This is like 
physical exercise. At first, you are sore, and then, things come together. 


With performing power meditations for given any length of time (they should be 
done every day), you will experience some serious power. You will no longer 
need props, spells, or rituals to get what you want. | was reading where this CoS 
member wrote where LaVey advised people to use props in order to "amplify" 
emotions and energy. For those of us who do these mediations, this is 
unnecessary. Your intentions will not need to be amplified. If anything, you will 
find your emotions and personal power will need to be controlled and toned 
down. You will see what | mean if you are doing the meditations consistently. 


11 


12 


Physics of the Soul 


There is a sub-atomic particle, discovered in 1956, called the neutrino. This 
particle, because of its extremely tiny size, and elusive behavior is difficult for 
scientists to study. The missing 9/10ths of the universe is thought to be 
comprised of neutrinos and neutrino-like particles. Although neutrinos have 
mass, they pass right through physical matter. It has been estimated that a 
neutrino from the sun would stand a good chance of penetrating a thickness of 
lead stretching from Earth to the nearest star without colliding with anything. 


Recent developments in physics, astronomy, and neurology provide an 
unexpected breakthrough into the understanding of psychic and paranormal 
phenomena. The atoms of our physical bodies contain the much finer and faster 
vibrating neutrinos and neutrino-like particles. These finer and faster vibrating 
particles compose the substance of the soul, that is joined to our physical body 
by a magnetic cord that breaks at the moment of death. The soul breaks loose 
from the body when the body is no longer able to function as a home for it. 


When one applies one's self to consistent power meditation, one's chakras 
vibrate at faster speeds. This takes training, preparation, and readiness, but 
through the higher speeds, approaching the speed of light, one is able to access 
other dimensions at will. 


Humanity currently resides in a lower dimension. This has much to do with our 
earth and its position in space. In higher dimensions, colors, shapes, sounds, 
and thoughts are more vivid. One can see through walls and have the sensation 
of omnipresence. Telepathy is extremely enhanced and other senses become 
much stronger and more open beyond anything most people have experienced. 


13 


14 


Occult Power in the Brain 


The pineal gland is the part 

of the brain that empowers 

Patios what is known as the "sixth 

A Pe neh sense" and other 

Parietal Lobe paranormal abilities. It is 
Corpus Callosum also the center of bliss 

¢-}- Parietal Lobe sensations and is known as 

en Gland “the seat of the soul.” The 

_—Cerebellum 7 F 7 

6 — sacprain pineal gland is defunct in the 

eee oo average person. A defunct 

LR ( Brain men pineal gland is analogous to 
Oblongata \ a severed spinal cord where 

the brain cannot send 
messages to move the body 

parts beneath the area that has been severed. The only difference is it affects the 

soul. In order to activate the pineal gland, power meditations must be must done 

regularly. It takes time to empower this gland and to activate it and use it. 

The pineal gland works in conjunction with the pituitary gland. Both of these 

glands are stimulated through the opening of the crown meditation. 


The Location of Occult Power 


(Thalamus 


\ a 
\ Hypothalamus > 
oe 


Limbic - 5 
System Ry Amygdala. 
I oe 
/ Pituitary 


Hippocampus 
L 
The Human Brain 


The Pineal and Pituitary adapt and lower the frequency of bioelectrical currents. 
They are psychic energy transformers. Psychic energy enters through the higher 
chakras, and descends down through the crown chakra where it enters the pineal 
gland in the brain. As it enters the brain, the rate of vibration is slowed down. An 
active pineal gland acts as a transformer that further slows down the energy to a 
lower frequency. The energy then enters and moves from the hypothalamus 
region of the brain into the pituitary gland. The pituitary further transforms the 
energy to an even lower frequency so that it can be assimilated and read by the 
brain. 

The Corpus Collossum works to exchange information between both 
hemispheres of the brain. Most humans do not use the right side of the brain, as 
we live in a left-brained world. Void meditation silences the left side of thinking 
and logic, and opens us to the right side, which is the intuitive/psychic side. 


Light is essential to the soul. So much negativity has been associated with light 
because of Christian corruption of ancient teachings, and the new age 
movement. Light is connected with lightening which is symbolic of the creation 
and is an age-old symbol of Satan- the lightening bolt. We can travel on light and 
use light for our own purposes. When the pineal gland is activated and expands, 
the sensation is extremely blissful. An activated pineal gland will drastically 
increase your powers and psychic awareness. | accomplished this through 
rotation of condensed chi/witchpower. This is an advanced meditation and in 
Volume III of this series. This is a major step in the transformation of the soul and 
will permanently change the aura. 


15 


16 


Aspects of the Soul 


Several different aspects make up the human soul. These are the aura, the light 
body, the chakras, the ethereal double, (the ghost that takes on the image of the 
physical body), and the intelligence/consciousness. The human soul is also 
made up of the elements fire, earth, air, water, and quintessence. 


In doing research, | have found major discrepancies among authors as to the 
specific aspects of the KA, the BA, the AKH and the SAHU- the parts of soul as 
defined by the Ancient Egyptians. From what | can gather, the real meaning of 
the Egyptian concept of the "REN" is the individual vibration of the soul. This has 
to do with the Egyptian Kabalah (KA BA AKH). The original Kabalah was 
Egyptian and the purpose was meditation upon the different aspects of the soul, 
both separately and together in combinations. This form of meditation is 
advanced. 


The human soul can at will be divided during meditation. This is what occurs with 
deliberate astral projection or involuntary "out of the body" experiences. Just as 
the soul can be divided, it can be reunited at will. The soul can be merged with 
the soul of another person. 


The aura can be expended and contracted at will. It can be programmed to 
attract or repel anything at will. The aura can be programmed by will to act upon 
the aura of another for better or worse. Our auras act as a filter/barrier to protect 
us spiritually. 


Each aspect of the soul can be meditated upon separately and empowered. 
Each aspect can invoke and hold each of the elements. This is very advanced 
and can be dangerous if one does not know what one is doing. 


The images at left illustrate two main parts 


a 
f of the soul, the aura on the left and the light 
body on the right. The aura radiates to the 
outside of and is an illuminated outline of the 
% body, the light body glows from within. The 
~" power, size, and intensity of both depend on 
4 the strength of the soul and the life force 
ody is shapeless. Though both illustrations 
S body is shapel Though both illustrati 


(chi/witchpower). Bear in mind, the light 


are white light, these bodies can be of any color and can change color as to 
moods, health, emotions, and so forth. They can also be of more than one color. 


The above, | write from my own direct experiences and not theory. 


17 


18 


The Chakras 


Crown 7 
oT 
ith 6 s 
Temple Chakrag \ 
ire 
fg | 
eo 
eee 
Hip Ch: I= q 
\d ’ ee 
The 13 Main Chakras of the Soul ° 


There are 13 main chakras, with the seven located extending along the spine as 
the most powerful; the shoulder chakras being close to the spinal chakras in 
power and the hip and temple chakras supporting these. 


The temple, hip and shoulder chakras make up the "Pillars" of the "Temple of 
Solomon." 666 is the Kabalistic square of the Sun. The true meaning of the 
"Temple of Solomon" is the TEMPLE OF THE SUN. "Sol""Om" and "On" are all 
words for the Sun. "Sol" is the Latin word for the Sun and is close to the English 
word "soul.""Om" is a name given by the Hindus to the Spiritual Sun and "On" is 
an Egyptian word for Sun. The symbolism of the 
Temple of Solomon is correctly the transformed human 
soul, but was stolen and corrupted by the Jews and 
made into another false Jewish character, as with the 
fictitious nazarene, and nearly everything in the 
Judeo/Christian Bible. The Sun represents the 
enlightened, transformed, and empowered soul. 

A diagram of the human soul can be seen in Astaroth's 
Sigil at right. The two bars on each side are the pillars 
of positive and negative energy on each side of the 
human soul- the black and white of yin and yang and 
the checkerboard; the glyph for Venus symbolizes the heart chakra. The five 
points of Astaroth's Sigil represent the five elements, fire, earth, air, water, and 
quintessence invoked into the three all-important knots of the soul. This has to do 
with the Tarot, Note ASTAROTh which was taken from its Ancient Egyptian 
origins and hideously corrupted into the Jewish "Torah" or "Pentateuch" and 
"Five Books of Moses" nonsense. 


19 


The human soul is in the shape of an equal armed cross. This is represented by 
"The Four Quarters" The "Four Directions" and the Four Crowned Princes of Hell 
in rituals. 


> The front of the body/soul is the North, ruled by the element of earth. 

The rear/backside of the body is the South, ruled by the element of Fire 

> The left side of the body is the Negative Pole. Through the left hand, we 
take in energy. The left side is ruled over by the element of water and is 
the direction west. 

>» The right side is the Positive Pole and is ruled over by the element of air. 
We direct energy through our right hand. 

> The element of Quintessence/either is in the center 

Fire and Air are electric 

> Water and Earth are magnetic 


ini 


7 Nf 


Each of the seven main chakras has a specific function and power. All of the 
chakras, both major and minor directly affect the organs of the body that they are 
in proximity with. This is a reciprocal relationship in regards to health, as an 
unhealthy organ will affect the power of the chakra and visa versa. 

Kundalini lies coiled at the base of the spine beneath the base chakra located at 
the tailbone. Kundalini lies dormant until it is stimulated through power meditation 
or in rare cases, it ascends through accident, being either physical injury or other 
trauma. 


Each chakra is in the shape of a small funnel, like a miniature tornado. The 
chakras are always spinning unless one wills them to stop as in some methods of 
astral projection. 


A basic overview of the seven main chakras: 


1. The base/root chakra known in Sanskrit as the "Muladhara" controls the 
bowels, the bladder, lower colon, legs, and adrenal glands. This chakra is 
red in color. Its element is earth, its metal is lead, and it is ruled by the 
planet Saturn. It is the first of the three knots, the others are located at the 
heart and at the sixth chakra behind the third eye. This chakra gives 
stability and grounding. It rules over survival and base instincts. The base 
chakra gives us the will to survive, our basic self-image, and sense of 
security. Anger and rage emanate from this chakra, thus the phrase 
"seeing red." The first three chakras are most influential in workings of 
black magick. 


2. The sacral chakra known in Sanskrit as the "Svadisthana" is also known 
as the sexual chakra. This chakra is orange in color and controls sexual 
lust, the sexual and reproductive organs, the lower abdomen, and kidneys. 
Its element is water and its metal is iron. It is ruled over by the planet 


20 


Mars. It influences pleasure, indulgence, sexuality, and creativity. The 
sacral and solar chakras empower workings of sex magick. 


. The solar plexus chakra known in Sanskrit as the "Manipura" is the chakra 
of the will. This is where the fighting power emanates. It rules over the 
digestive system, the stomach, the pancreas, and the muscles. The solar 
chakra is yellow in color and ruled by the Sun. Its element is fire and its 
metal is gold. Here is the chakra one uses to impress one's will upon 
another. This chakra is the '666' chakra; the powerhouse of the soul. 


. The heart chakra known in Sanskrit as the Anahata. It is ruled over by the 
planet Venus, its metal is copper, and its element is air. It controls the love 
emotion, the thymus gland, the lungs, and the heart. It controls the 
circulatory system of the soul. 

Now as we know as Satanists, the New Age movement is not only off 
base, but lacks a lot of knowledge. We hear this incessant message of 
"love" ad nauseum, of how the heart chakra is the "love" chakra- 
compassion, self-sacrifice, giving, etc. This is a delusion. 


The heart chakra neuter and is the connection point between the upper 
and lower chakras, like the corpus collossum connects both hemispheres 
of the brain. The upper chakras deal with the astral; astral sight and 
telepathy, connecting with others psychically and transferring one's will, 
sending receiving telepathic messages (3rd eye), astral hearing and 
communication (throat) and astral knowledge and understanding of the 
universe (the crown). 


The lower chakras deal with earthly matters- survival (base), sexuality, 
creativity (2nd) and the will, rebellion (3rd). 


The Gods and Pharaohs of Ancient Egypt are often seen with their arms 

crossed over their chests. This symbolizes protection of the heart chakra. 
The nazarene who is an enemy to humanity is always seen with his arms 
open and many paintings with the virgin bitch- same thing- exposing the 

heart chakra so humans can be psychically victimized. 


New age teachings are corrupted and incomplete. What the enemy fears 
the most is humanity having the knowledge to defend ourselves as a 
whole and the self-esteem to REFUSE to be slaves. 


. The throat chakra known as the Visudda in Sanskrit, rules over the neck, 
thyroid gland, throat, mouth, voice, ears, hearing, and trachea. This 
chakra is sky blue in color and rules over communication, intellect, and 
self-expression. Its planet is Mercury, its metal is liquid Mercury or 
quicksilver, and its element is air. This chakra also rules over 
clairaudience [psychic hearing], and is the seat of emotion. 


21 


6. The sixth chakra known as the Ajna in Sanskrit is located directly behind 
the third eye. The third eye is an extension of this chakra and rules the 
psychic sight. This chakra is the psychic seat of the soul. When activated, 
it will often light up brilliantly. It rules over the eyes, both physical and 
astral vision and the pineal gland. It is violet-blue/indigo in color, its 
element is the ether, its metal is silver, its and its planet is the Moon. This 
chakra is where the ida and pingala meet and is the psychic seat of the 
soul. In some workings, energy is directed from the base chakra, up the 
spine to the sixth chakra and projected out the third eye, as seen in many 
Egyptian hieroglyphs. 


7. The crown chakra known as the Sahasrara in Sanskrit is at the top of the 
head, right on top. It is violet in color, it rules over the brain, the pituitary, 
the nervous system. In allegory, its symbol is the thousand-petalled lotus. 
This symbol goes back to Ancient Egypt. This chakra induces bliss states. 
Demons informed me it is ruled by the element of water. This chakra rules 
over all of the psychic senses. When it is opened and activated, one may 
hear astral voices. 


22 


¥ 
© 


se 


Minor Heart Chakras 


C. 


Minor Chakras above the head 


Minor Chakras of the Face 


23 


24 


Opening the Chakras 


These meditations have been revised. Azazel who is a Master of Spiritual 
Alchemy worked with me in detail on each one of them. They are extremely 
powerful and often, the effects can be felt hours later. It is important to follow 
instructions and if you are new to power meditation, to go slow. If you have 
already done the former Awakening meditations, it is fine to do these. Quite a few 
people reported little or no effects from the former meditations that were taken 
from books. 


There are a certain number of repetitions for each exercise. If you find you are 
getting over stimulated, it is advised you end the exercise and back off. The 
exercise can be resumed at a later date while you give your nervous system time 
to adjust to the increased life force. It is strongly recommended to give yourself a 
few days or more between each exercise. 


People who have problems with seizures/epilepsy, or who are on psychiatric 
medications should not perform any of these power meditations, with the 
exception of void meditation, unless given the ok by their physician. They are 
highly effective in opening the chakras and stimulating the kundalini. These new 
meditations are filled with Satanic energy. Those who have not dedicated or are 
outsiders should give this consideration. For dedicated Satanists, the effects 
should be very positive in opening and empowering the chakras and in 
increasing personal power. 


These meditations can produce very rapid results. Standard kundalini 
meditations of the New Age variety can take years to have a pronounced effect. 
These meditations, like Satanism are the real thing. 

Void meditation is highly recommended in order to control the thoughts and mind 
that will be stimulated by the opening of the chakras. 


>» There are a certain number of repetitions for each exercise. If you find you 
are getting over stimulated, it is advised you end the exercise and back 
off. The exercise can be resumed at a later date while you give your 
nervous system time to adjust to the increased life force. 


> The meditations are performed with specific chants for each chakra. Each 
chant is based on the Yogic Humming Breath. With this breath, you inhale 
to fill your lungs and with the exhale, you vibrate the chant until you are 
out of breath, then you breathe in and fill your lungs as before: 


This breath is normally used with the throat chakra; 
Inhale through your nose, filling your lungs 

Exhale on one long vibration, this will draw out the exhale 
Breathe in again and repeat. 


VVVV 


25 


> Some of the chants/vibrations are based upon runes. Runes are based 
upon the constellations and are the most ancient of alphabets. They are 
the original form of writing and the cuneiform script was derived from 
them.* Many of the runes can still be seen in the cuneiform characters. 
The runes have always been an abomination to the xian church, more so 
than with any other form of magick. 


> For the first through fourth chakras, it is necessary to apply what is known 
as the "Jalandahara Bandha." This is where you nod your head and press 
your chin firmly, but gently against your chest. This greatly facilitates the 
effects of the chants in the lower chakras. 


>» Mudras (hand positions) are used as these connect certain circuits within 
the fingers and redirect the life force to the chakra being opened. 


You should focus on the chakras in the middle of your body. Extensions are 
along the spine and in the front of the body. Opening and empowering these are 
more advanced and specific meditations are given in the advanced meditation 
volume. Too much stimulation right away is undesirable. Everyone comes to 
Satanism on different levels. Those of us who empowered our souls in past lives 
will be much more sensitive to the meditations. This is inborn, but anyone who 
performs the following exercises will eventually open their chakras. 


* From Azazel 


26 


Opening the Third Eye 


This exercise is done with a specific tone and chant. 
You need to do this exercise for 4 days in a row. 
Regular meditation on the third eye should follow to 
completely open it up and establish an energy uptake. 
This exercise only gets it going. Further work is needed 
and must be consistent to reap maximum results. 


1. Sit with your back straight. 


2. Place your hands in the position as shown in 
the photo. Your for people who are right handed, 
your right hand should make a fist around your 
left index finger; for people who are left-handed, 
your left hand should make a fist around your 
right index finger. The thumbnail should press on 
the side of the finger as shown, at the spot where the cuticle ends. When you feel 
a very faint electrical shock, you will know you have the correct spot. Don't get 
discouraged if you cannot find it. It should be apparent in those who have 
naturally stronger auras. What this does is redirect the flow of energy to the third 
eye. This mudra can be used at any time during regular meditation on the third 
eye. Keep this position throughout the meditation. 


3. Breathe in through your nose and on the exhale vibrate "Thoth." Thoth is the 
Moon God and the ruler of the 6th chakra and third eye is the moon. Release 
your breath slowly through your mouth and vibrate: 
TH-TH-TH-TH-OH-OH-OH-TH-TH-TH in one long exhale (vibrate the sound one 
time per exhale, as with the Yogic "humming breath"). 

Now this is important. Keep the TH and OH sounding at the same time. You 
should be making the TH sound all throughout the exhale. 

Your tongue will be vibrating between your teeth. It may take a few seconds to 
adjust this to where you feel it in the middle of your forehead (3rd eye), don't 
worry, just keep on going. 

Try to get it to the correct vibration where you can feel it in your forehead. This 
can take some experimenting. Just do the best you can. You may have to try as 
many as ten to fifteen times or more to get it right. 


4. Do the above 4 times in a row and then relax. 

ird Eye 
5. Now, align your third eye correctly by visualizing it point 
end facing inside as illustrated at left. 


6. It is very important the above exercise be done for 


27 


FOUR consecutive days, preferably 24 hours apart. Then it is a done deal and 
you will have performed the initial step of opening and activating your third eye. 


7. After you are finished, it is important to meditate on your third eye to get the 
energy flowing, this way it will fully open. 

Just close your eyes and "look" at the 3rd eye in the middle of your forehead. It is 
important to relax and not to strain your eye muscles, even though your eyes are 
closed. At first, there is usually just blackness depending on how active your 3rd 
eye is, then possibly swirling colors and shapes like a kaleidoscope. Like scrying 
into a mirror, the colors and shapes will give way to images when you do the 
meditation long enough and regularly. Remember to keep your gaze soft and 
relaxed. Feeling pressure here or a knot is normal after the above exercise is 
completed. This usually diminishes in time. 


WHAT YOU CAN EXPECT: 


1. One of the first experiences is a headache or pressure in the center of the 
forehead. This sensation may also feel like it is originating from within, usually an 
inch or more beneath the surface of the forehead as it affects the sixth chakra. 
This is a positive indication the pineal gland is awakening and beginning to 
function in a healthy manner. 


You may also find you can feel this ache or pressure whenever you focus your 
attention on your third eye or meditate on your third eye. This is perfectly normal 
and eases with time. 

*Some people can experience a migraine lasting several hours. The severity of 
the side effects will depend on how atrophied your pineal gland is to begin with. 


28 


The Third Eye 


The 3rd Eye is directly related to the 6th chakra and the pineal gland. It is 
located on the middle of the forehead above the brows and along with the 6th 
chakra that sets in back of the third eye and the pineal gland, it is the psychic 
sight of the soul. 

In the average person, the pineal gland is atrophied and dormant. Because of 
centuries of humanity being cut off from practicing power meditation where 
energy is circulated like blood where it is needed, many areas of the human soul 
have ceased to function - another sad result of xianity. 


The third eye contains the last of the three knots. Once this knot is open and 
energy flows through, the crown chakra is easy to open. The third eye contains 
the astral sight. Through the third eye, astral images are transferred to the brain. 
The third eye is also important in telepathy and influencing others. | have found in 
willing others, thought energy should strongly be directed to the other person's 
third eye, even though this cannot be seen. The third eye is receptive to energy 
directed at it. 


The third eye, along with the sixth chakra, controls the eyesight, the sinuses, and 
the skin. It is with the third eye that we can see auras, do scrying, and see 
energy. The pineal gland and the sixth chakra are behind the third eye. 


The third eye is the front of the 6th chakra. The 6th chakra is where the ida and 
pingala serpents meet. When the kundalini pierces this chakra, it opens the last 
of the three knots. A flash of light is often experienced when this occurs. Opening 
the 3rd eye is a major step in consciousness. Opening the Crown Chakra 


29 


Opening the Sixth Chakra 


The third eye is an EXTENSION of the 6th chakra, which is located directly 
beneath the crown chakra, right in the middle of the brain. OPENING the 6th 
chakra [this is done the exact same way as with the third eye and should only be 
done after opening all of the other chakras], will help to activate the pineal gland 
and much more. See page 27. The third eye mudra is unnecessary. 


Because of the power of opening this chakra, | do not recommend to open it until 
you have opened all of your other chakras. Your third eye should also be all the 
way open, as it acts as a vent for the powerful energies of the sixth chakra. 


| just found this recently through my own experiences in meditation. Every book | 
have read [plenty] focuses on the third eye, not the 6th chakra, which is directly 
in back of the third eye. | have found through my own experience, the 6th chakra 
directly ties into the pineal gland and activates it. It seems to be much more 
powerful than the third eye. 


Vv 


f 


Sixth Chakra 


1. Sit with your back straight, breathe in through your nose and on the exhale 
vibrate "Thoth." Release your breath slowly through your mouth and vibrate: TH- 
TH-TH-TH-OH-OH-OH-TH-TH-TH in one long exhale (vibrate the sound one time 
per exhale, as with the Yogic "humming breath") and try to concentrate the 
vibration on your 6th chakra. 

Now this is important. Keep the TH and OH sounding at the same time. You 
should be making the TH sound all throughout the exhale. 

Your tongue will be vibrating between your teeth. It may take a few seconds to 
adjust this to where you feel it in your 6th chakra, don’t worry, just keep on going. 
Try to get it to the correct vibration where you can feel it in the middle of your 
brain. This can take some experimenting. Just do the best you can. You may 
have to try as many as ten to fifteen times or more to get it right. 


2. Do the above 4 times in a row and then relax. 


3. Now, align your sixth chakra correctly by visualizing it point end facing down 
as illustrated at left. The color of the sixth chakra is bluish-violet. 


4. It is very important the above exercise be done for FOUR consecutive days, 
preferably 24 hours apart. 


30 


Opening the Crown Chakra 


The Location of Oceult Power In order for this to work properly, you must 
have already performed the Opening of 
the Third Eye 


Frontal Lobe QE = 7 | i — Parietal Lobe 
Corpus Callosum 


Thatams Kx Q pineal Giend Ne effects of this exercise are extremely 

~S ay —corebotm pleasurable. A feeling of lightness should 
Sytem Armypaali — follow. Some people may feel energy or 
iu -—_Medutia | Brain Stem tingling inside their heads, or completely 


i acs covering their heads; a slight pressure in 
the crown area and intense euphoria. The 
pleasant light feeling is what makes astral projection and astral travel easy. The 


bliss state can occur hours and even days later. 


The Human Brain 


When done properly, this exercise will stimulate the pineal gland and crown 
chakra. By continually stimulating the pineal gland, it will grow and become 
active. The pineal gland is the psychic seat of the soul. With this revised 
meditation, the chant is much more powerful and effective. It is based on the 
Bojrk rune.* Opening this pathway is also very healing for drug addicts as it 
naturally induces extreme pleasure. 

This exercise should be done only to initially open your crown chakra and 
stimulate your pineal gland. The vibration is very intense and effective, but 
produces quite a headache, which can occur the following day. If your crown 
chakra is open, you will feel lightness and a sense of bliss. If you do not 
experience these indications after a period of 4-5 days, you can redo this 
exercise again as many times as needed to open your crown. 


1. Breath in deeply and hold your breath for a count of four; do this five times. 
This helps you to be relaxed, focused, and to enter into a trance state. Then 
focus all of your concentration on your 3rd eye. You should begin to feel a slight 
pressure sensation or awareness of your 3rd eye. 


x Vy \Y 2. Now, place your hands in the position shown at left and 
} VA, Fi \\) take a deep breath as you did for the awakening one 
ie exercise and hold it for as long as comfortable- (do not 
push this) and release your breath vibrating b-b-b-b-b-b-b- 
b (vibrate with a deep, soft hum with the lips almost closed) 
The vibration should sound like a bee. The bee was sacred in Ancient Egypt and 
many other ancient cultures for this very reason. 
It is ok to adjust your pitch. You should focus on and feel the vibration in your 
third eye, then focus on your pineal gland. You should be 1/3rd the way through 
of your drawn out vibrating exhale and feel the vibration in your pineal gland. 


31 


Then, focus on your crown and feel the vibration in your crown chakra. Continue 
to extend your exhale as long as you are able to. 


Breathe in again, repeating this four times. 
This exercise is extremely powerful, much more powerful than the former 
version. 


Now, VERY IMPORTANT- 


Remember to concentrate on your forehead (3rd eye area), then your pineal 
gland and finally your crown chakra. You should regulate the exhale so it evens 
out. This is done for the duration of each chant. 


Summary: 

1. Breath in 

2. Begin to exhale, vibrating b-b-b-b-b-b-b-b 

3. Concentrate on and feel the vibration in your 3rd eye 

4. Concentrate on and feel the vibration in your pineal gland 
5. Concentrate on and feel the vibration in your crown chakra 
Repeat 3 more times for a total of 4 times. 


Crown Chakra Now align your crown chakra by visualizing it point down as 
illustrated at left. 


32 


Opening the Throat Chakra 


To activate the throat chakra, fold your hands together as in 
the photo, thumbs touching side by side- do not fold the 
thumbs. Take a deep breath; hold as in the other awakening 
exercises and then vibrate: "Nebo" until your breath is fully 
released. 

N-N-N-N-EH-EH-EH-EH-B-B-B-B-OH-OH-OH-OH 

The important thing is to feel it strongly in your throat, above 
the hollow. Do this 5-7 times. Remember- getting the correct 
tone can take some practice. The chant should vibrate your throat area. This 
exercise can be done once a week or more as needed. 


Now align your throat chakra point down as illustrated at 
left. 


33 


34 


Opening the Heart Chakra 


Azazel explained the crossing of the arms completes a circuit that directly affects 
the heart chakra. 
1. Sit comfortably, relax, and go into a meditative state. 


2. Cross your arms as in the example. Your hands 
should be touching your shoulders near your armpits. 


3. Position your hands so your thumb connects with 
your ring and little finger, leaving your index and middle 
fingers pointed straight. 


4. Take a deep breath and nod your head so your chin 
is gently pressed into your chest. Keep your chin firmly against your 
chest during each exhale, only raising your head to inhale. 


5. Focus your attention on your heart chakra. 
Exhale and chant "Amon" 
AH-AH-AH-AH-M-M-M-UH-UH-UH-N-N-N 


6. Extend the N-N-N-N-N until you have completely exhaled. 

Try to adjust the tone so you feel it in the middle of your 

chest where your heart chakra is located. 

7. Repeat eight times. 

7. Visualize the image at right where your heart chakra is and yourself engulfed 


in a vibrant green aura and focus your attention on feeling your heart chakra for 
several minutes. 


35 


36 


Opening the Solar Plexus Chakra 


1. Sit in a comfortable position with your spine straight. 

2. Relax and go into a meditative state. 

3. Place your hands in the solar mudra illustrated at left. 

4. Inhale fully and drop your chin to your chest. Keep your chin 

gently, but firmly pressed against your chest throughout the 

entire exhale, only raising your head during the inhale. 

5. Vibrate "RA" 

R-R-R-R-AH-AH-AH-AH-AH 

until you are out of breath, concentrating on your solar plexus 
chakra. Adjust the vibration of the chant so you can feel it in 
your solar plexus chakra. 
6. Repeat 5 times. 
7. Now, align your solar chakra point facing down as illustrated 
on the left. 


37 


38 


Opening the Sacral Chakra 


1. Fold your hands. DO NOT fold your thumbs, place them side 
by side and keep your palms together. 

2. Inhale and fill your lungs. 

3. Drop your chin to your chest. 

4. Contract your anus. 

5. Exhale and chant I-I-N-N-N-N-G-G-G-G-G-G-G-G-G (rhymes 
with the English word "Thing.") and concentrate on your second 
sacral chakra. 


{ } 6. Align your chakra point facing upwards as illustrated at left. 


{ \ Repeat the above eight times. When you are finished, visualize 
\ yourself in an orange aura for a few minutes while 

focusing on feeling your sacral chakra. 

The "Ing" Rune illustrated at right represents the ro 

creative life force ruled by this chakra. The 


} magickal qualities of the Ing Rune are its use in 
sex magick and fertility. The sacral chakra is the sexual chakra. 


39 


40 


Opening the Base Chakra 


To open the base chakra, place your hands in the position shown in the photo, 
like the sign of the horns. Your finger pads should be touching and your thumbs 
should be touching side by side down to the fleshy part known in palmistry as the 
"Mount of Venus." This mudra produces a heat sensation in the hands and 
stimulates the base chakra. Don't worry if you cannot feel the heat sensation as 
this takes sensitivity. 


The backs of the middle and ring fingers should be touching, as in 
the photo at left. 


Breathe in and fill your lungs, but not to discomfort and with the 
exhale, make the s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s hissing sound. 


i The Sigel Rune symbolizes the Satanic Lightening 
fy \ 4 Bolt which is a manifestation of the kundalini 


serpent and the creation; the spark of life. Kundalini 


sf 
\ 
, 
Mf, ’ is like lightening. 
ins 


While exhaling with the hissing sound, try to imagine/feel 
your base chakra as very hot and visualize it about the size 
of a pea, opening and expanding into a vortex. Spin this vortex. 
Continue visualizing your chakra lighting up into red/gold and expanding with a 
bright white/gold fire, about the size of a silver dollar coin in diameter and 
imagine the feeling of it growing hotter as it gets brighter. 


The hissing breath should be done seven times. 


Align your base chakra point facing upwards as you did with your solar and 
sacral chakras. 


a 


42 


Opening the 8" and 9" Chakras 


Research and revelation from Thoth has revealed the true 8" and 9"" chakras are 
the shoulder chakras. Opening these will align the soul and drastically open 
energy pathways to the palm chakras, greatly empowering them. 


1 
2; 
3 
4 
5: 
6. 


N 


To open your shoulder chakras, all you need to do is to 
visualize them as in the illustration at left. Focus and 
meditate on them for a few minutes. A feeling of aching, or 
pressure is a positive sign you were successful in opening 
them. This feeling can extend to your arms and can feel sort 
of like they are falling asleep. 

Now, align your chakras. 


. Begin with the base chakra and turn the cone so the point is upwards. 


Do the same with the sacral chakra 


. Focus on the solar chakra and turn it so the point is facing downwards. 
. Focus your attention on your crown chakra and turn the point down. 


Do the same with your sixth and throat chakras. 

Now, focus on your heart chakra and visualize two points coming together 
and intersecting as shown in the illustration on page 35. 

Finish by again focusing on your shoulder chakras and visualize them 
pointing inward. 


43 


44 


Opening and Aligning the 10" and 11" Temple Chakras 


The 10" and 11" chakras are located at the temples, a bit towards the rear and 
are extensions of the 6" chakra. 

To open these chakras, 

just turn your attention to each 
one and visualize it point 
facing in. Then do the same 
on the other side. A weird 
feeling of aching, heaviness, 
pressure, or aching is a 
positive sign you have 
correctly located and opened them. 
The temple chakras are extensions of the sixth chakra. 


Opening and Aligning the 12" and 13" Hip Chakras 


To open these chakras, just turn your attention to each 
one and visualize it point facing in. Then do the same 
on the other side. A weird feeling of aching, heaviness, 


A a ¥ pressure, or aching is a positive sign you have correctly 
‘ a » located and opened them. 
\ee a The hip chakras are extensions of the base chakra, but 
7 like the shoulder chakras in proximity to the heart, they 
a“ _ , are located a bit higher. 


45 


46 


Opening the Hand Chakras 


What this exercise does, when done consistently is 
to establish an energy circuit within the hand 
chakras. This energy can be used for healing, 
opening other chakras, applying energy or as with 
Dim Mak, the "death touch." It also helps with 
‘ telekinesis (moving objects with one's mind and 

: pyrokinesis (setting objects on fire using the powers 
of the mind and aura). In order to advance with 
these gifts, a powerful aura is needed to act on the 
auras of objects. 

This exercise should be done at least once a day to get your energy flowing 

freely through your hand chakras. 


1. Sit comfortably and relax. Try to go into a trance as the deeper the trance 
and level of concentration, the better the results, especially when 
beginning this exercise. After an energy current within the hand chakras is 
open and flowing, this can be done anywhere at will. 


2. Put your hands facing each other, fingertips almost touching and relaxed. 
(Your fingers can be slightly bent as in the illustration). 


3. With the pad of your thumb, press into the palm of each of your hands, 
right in the hollow part. 


4. Now, focus intensely upon your hands, especially your palms. Feel the 
area you pressed in with your thumb. 


5. Keep focusing all of your concentration and begin to feel a warm glow and 
energy between your palms. 


6. Begin to move your hands an inch or two apart slowly and back again to 
where your fingertips are almost touching. Try to feel the energy between 
the palms of your hands. The more you practice and the stronger your 
energy becomes, keep moving your hands in and out, further and further 
apart until you can feel your energy as far apart as two or more feet. 


7. Now, visualize a ball of white-hot fire like the sun as in the picture above. 
Later on, you can use colors. Feel the heat and energy from this ball of fire 
between your hands. This may feel as a tingling or throbbing. For some 
people, it may even feel cold. The important thing is to get this energy 
flowing and to *feel* it. 


47 


8. Now let your arms hang down and relax. Focus on energy flowing down 
your arms into your hands. This may feel tingly and your lower arms and 
hands may feel pumped. This is a sign the energy is flowing. Now repeat 
steps 5 through 7 above. 


9. Do the above exercise 4 times. 
This exercise should be done every day for as long as it takes to really open your 
hand chakras and establish a permanent flow of energy. With the proper 


practice, you should be able to feel powerful energy between your hands when 
your hands are more than a foot apart. 


48 


Opening the Feet Chakras 


This exercise is done standing. Relax and "breathe" in energy 
through the bottoms of your feet, mainly your heels. The feet chakras 
tie directly into the base chakra and sacral chakra. This may result in 
stimulating your sex organs as well as the feet are tied to orgasm. 


Continue drawing the energy up through your feet into your base 


chakra and up your spine and out your crown. Continue breathing the 
energy in for a few minutes. 


49 


50 


Correct Chakra Alignment 


| want to make something very clear here. For any non-Satanists, whether you 
are so-called "New Age" "Mystics" or whatever, if you proceed to read on, 
NEVER FORGET- THIS KNOWLEDGE CAME FROM SATAN AND THE 
EGYPTIAN GOD, THOTH. Thoth is with the Powers of Hell. 


The cross has been hideously corrupted by Christianity. 
The equal armed cross represents the four 
corners/quarters and directions, such as when we 
summon the Four Crowned Princes of Hell during ritual. 
The cross is a CONCEPT and, as seen in many of the 
Demons' Sigils. The cross shape is the correct alignment 
of the chakras on the inside. The correct alignment of the 
chakras IS IN THE SHAPE OF AN INVERTED LATIN 

Set CROSS. THE CHRISTIAN CROSS IS A CORRUPTION 
AND A BLASPHEMY. 


The inverted cross has long been a symbol in 

Satanism and for very good reason. The third chakra; Vv 
also known as the 'Solar' chakra, the 'Sun' chakra; is 

also the all-important '666' chakra, as 666 is the 


kabbalistic square of the Sun; also represented by the Vv 
swastika, which is an ancient symbol of the Sun. This 
chakra, NOT the heart chakra, is the powerhouse of r 


the soul. New Age and related teachings focus on the lar 


heart chakra so that everyone is deprived of power oe 
and worse. The heart chakra is neuter, and mainly be <j 
connects the upper and lower chakras. A 1 


Popular information readily available on the chakras is 
not only dangerous but extremely inaccurate. The 
other three are male and female pairs that should be 
matched as they work together. 

As we know, the crown chakra is known as the 
‘thousand petal lotus.' The lotus is also known as a lily. 
Lily = 'Lilith.' In addition to each Demon as an actual 
living being, each Demon has his/her own spiritual 
message. Lilith rules the crown chakra. Satan rules 
the base. Both the base and crown chakras are a 
male and female couple and work together. That is 
one of their most important spiritual messages. This 
merging of male and female is the symbolism behind 
the illustration of Baphomet, who has both male and 
female organs, and also the ancient Egyptian 
Akhenaton, another hermaphrodite. 


51 


Now, with all of the repeated emphasis on the heart chakra by new age deluded 
fools [this is done purposely not only to keep people from true spiritual 
knowledge, but most importantly, from obtaining any serious spiritual power], 
when one advances enough in meditation and psychic abilities, one will find the 
yoni shaped heart chakra is the neuter. The yoni is the symbol for the vagina. 
The Christians have corrupted this, turning it onto its side into that foolish and 
most annoying fish symbol, which again, is a blasphemy to true spirituality and is 
like everything else in that foul program, stolen and false. 


"...seven towers - the Towers of Satan [Ziarahs] -six of them trapezoidal in form, 
and one, the "center" on Mount Lalesh, shaped like a sharp, fluted point." 
-- The Satanic Rituals by Anton LaVey 


The above excerpt is also an allegory, as the center is the odd one out, the heart 
chakra. It does have power, but not the power of the strongest chakra of the soul, 
the '666' chakra of the Sun. The powers of the heart chakra are minimal. This is 
why the enemy is always touting it in the mainstream books out there readily 
available to the public. 


The energy uptake of each chakra is at the wide Chak 
end and the energy output is at the point, also akra 
known as the ‘bindu.’ 


So it would stand to reason that the chakras such as \ Ehergy 
the third eye [DO NOT confuse this with the sixth v. tale 
chakra, which is BEHIND the third eye] need to ATA 
have their wide ends facing outwards to absorb 

energy. This definitely includes all of the minor Energy 

chakras. You will find that after aligning your output 


chakras correctly, you will feel more centered and 
healing and spellworking will come more easily. 


All one needs to do is to turn the solar 666 chakra so the point [bindu] is facing 
DOWN. This is the swastika chakra, the Sun chakra. All Pagan religions 
preceding Christianity focused intensely upon the Sun. This is the powerhouse of 
the soul. Thor's Hammer was originally in the shape of an inverted cross. Our 
earliest beginnings and life come from our naval, and the Sun chakra, the giver of 
power and life is centered behind the naval. This is where our main store of life- 
force/witchpower/vril/chi is located. The Sun chakra is paired with the 6th chakra 
and third eye, also known as the 'command center’ which is female. 


Now, popular writings tout the heart chakra as the 'seat of emotions.’ Again, this 
is another major misconception. The throat chakra is the seat of emotions. When 
we are sad and about to cry, the feeling is from the throat, not the heart. The 
same goes with happiness. Be aware of this. Both emotions come from the throat 
chakra. 


52 


The all popular hear shape, again, this is not of the heart. Its being touted as a 
symbol for the heart is again, corruption. This is to mislead you. The serpents 
cross, these are symbolic of the ida and pingala nadis of the soul. They cross on 
the throat chakra and swoop in the shape of a perfect heart to meet at the tip of 
the nose, forming a heart shape across the face. The popular arrow through the 
heart symbol is for ‘fixing the energy' representing the risen Serpent of Satan. 
The number 666, the inverted cross and all symbols of Satan are extremely 
sacred and carry a hidden message. 


Research and revelation from Thoth has revealed the true 
8th and 9th chakras are the shoulder chakras. Opening these 
will align the soul and drastically open energy pathways to 
the palm chakras, greatly empowering them. To open your 
shoulder chakras, all you need to do is to visualize them as in 
the illustration on the right. Focus and meditate on them for a 
few minutes. A feeling of aching, or pressure is a positive 
sign you were successful in opening them. This feeling can 
extend to your arms and can feel sort of like they are falling 
asleep. When the shoulder chakras are fully empowered, the 
wings of the soul manifest, indicating spiritual freedom. 


Always remember, when your chakras have been successfully opened and are 
active, you will feel them. This sensation is usually a feeling of pressure, a slight 
aching or tingling. Correctly aligning the chakras will drastically increase your 
power. 


1. Begin with the base chakra and turn the cone so the point is upwards. 

2. Do the same with the sacral chakra [2nd]. 

3. Now focus on your solar '666' chakra and turn it so it is pointing downwards. 
4. Do the same with your sixth and throat chakras- turn them so they are both 
pointing downwards. 

5. Now, focus on your heart chakra and visualize two points coming together and 
intersecting as shown immediately below here. 


™ 


6. Focus your attention on your crown chakra and turn the point down. 
7. Finish by again focusing on your shoulder chakras and visualize them pointing 
inward. 


53 


54 


Opening the Clairaudience Chakras 


pa 


S Lith 
q Oa 
‘sabcchsias Ear 


Meditating on your centers of clairaudience, also known as "psychic hearing" will 
empower your astral hearing. This is useful when communicating with Demons. 
Just relax and focus on each center, visualizing each one as a bright star. Spend 
a few minutes with each one. 


To open each of these minor chakras, just focus on them and visualize them 
opening up like a star and getting brighter. This may have to be done for several 
meditation sessions before they are permanently opened. The points are the 
same for both sides of the head, though the illustration directly above shows only 
one side of the face. 


You will notice changes in your awareness and psychic abilities when doing this 
exercise for any length of time. 


As you advance, you can do "chakra breathing" where you absorb energy with 
each inhale and slightly expand and brighten each chakra you are focusing on, 
upon the exhale." 


Align them all points facing inwards. 


55 


56 


Opening the Astral Eyes Chakras 


Meditating on your psychic eyes will empower 


sth Eye —<—¥ a x 
ath Eye your astral vision. It is easy. 
ate 
IE a °) Just close your eyes and "look" at the 3rd eye in 
¥ ee the middle of your forehead. It is important to relax 
— 


and not to strain your eye muscles, even though 
your eyes are closed. At first, there is usually just 
f yo blackness depending on how active your 3rd eye 
tae 5 is, then possibly swirling colors and shapes. Like 

. scrying into a mirror, the colors and shapes will 
give way to images when you do the meditation long enough and regularly. 
Remember to keep your focus soft and relaxed. 


After meditating on your 3rd eye, visualize your 3rd eye brightening and shining 
outward like the sun and direct this energy to each of your psychic eyes, 
beginning with your 1st and 2nd psychic eyes and back to your third eye and up 
through your 4th, 5th and 6th eye points. You can then circulate the energy up 
and down as a stream of brilliant light. It is important that your chakras are 
aligned properly. The points should turn inward, as illustrated in the picture at 
right. 


Another technique which is somewhat advanced is to perform 
the chakra breathing through each of the centers. Draw energy 
into either one specific center at a time or do all simultaneously 
with each inhale. Visualize each center lighting up and upon 
each exhale, expand each center slightly, like a brilliant star. If 
you are working on all simultaneously, it is important to visualize 
all of them at the same time. 


Remember to align them all points facing inwards as illustrated above right. 


57 


58 


Part II 
Foundation Meditations 


60 


Satanism and Power Meditation 


Power meditation is a psychic cleaning house so to speak. When one begins a 
power meditation program, one can usually expect repressed emotions to 
manifest- anger, hatred, rage, grief, you name it. You may find yourself having 
upsetting thoughts and feelings and not knowing why these are occurring. These 
emotions can last up to a year or more given the intensity of which they were 
suppressed in your younger years. Many of us can’t even remember, but our 
minds do. In time, suppressed emotions will be cleaned out and the soul will be 
able to advance and be free. One will find inner balance and peace. 


Learning is another thing. Satanism is intense and for many, embracing 
Satanism is a first time of coming into one’s own. When one acknowledges the 
years spent as a spiritual slave, without personal rights and is aware of years of 
unnecessary abuses, one may experience intense anger and other emotions. 
This is very normal and therapeutic. Just let it out in a constructive way. This is a 
time of inner change and cleansing; healing. In time, there will be inner peace 
and balance. How long this process takes or whether one goes through it is 
individual. | am posting this so everyone, especially those who are new will know 
this is normal. 

In time, we all come into our own and are free from the indoctrination and intense 
programming that most others are slaves to. There is nothing more beautiful than 
a free mind, for this is when we can truly advance and to know ourselves for 
whom we are- not for whom we are expected or told to be. 


61 


62 


Basic Meditation Program 


When one is new to power meditation, it is important to start out with a program. 
There are many different meditations on this site for different effects. A basic 
meditation program should consist of Void Meditation as this helps us in 
controlling unwanted thoughts and with directing our minds. 


Breathing exercises are essential to any meditation program. 


The Foundation Meditation is a very important meditation as it helps us to learn 
to feel and absorb energy, which is very important in working magick. If you are 
new, it is best to start out with basic white light. White light is easy to use 
because it contains all of the colors of the spectrum. With experience, you can 
advance to working with colors for specific things. Color energy is very powerful. 


Chakra work should be included in each meditation session as this is necessary 
to empower your aura and soul. | have found directed orgasm to be very effective 
in opening the chakras. Orgasm is a good way to open a meditation, as it is 
naturally relaxing. If your chakras are blocked, simply direct the energy during 
your climax, up your spine to the specific chakra. Visualize it as a stream of 
bright light in the same color as the chakra you are trying to open, and 
simultaneously visualize the blocked chakra opening and the energy flowing 
through it. This can take months, but in time, a permanent circuit will be 
established. 


The EZ Chakra Spin is fine to start out with before advancing to meditations that 
are more powerful. Remember, we are all individuals and where one person may 
experience pleasure and positive results for a specific meditation, another may 
not. Always go by the way you feel. If one meditation doesn’t feel right then stop 
and try another meditation. 


Meditation sessions should ideally last for 15 — 30 minutes a day. If you are short 
on time, doing just 5-10 minutes is better than doing nothing. Skipping days will 
throw you behind and when you are new, inconsistency can cause depression as 
your body tries to adjust to the increased bioelectricity. 


Aura Cleaning should also be done daily. This only takes a couple of minutes 
and in the long run, it prevents any negative energy from attaching itself to your 
aura. Negative energy causes accidents, sickness, and depression. 


Meditation programs should be changed every so often. An indication your 
program needs changing is when you no longer feel any progress. As long as 
you are comfortable with a certain program and make advances, there is no need 
to change, unless you get bored. 


63 


The objective of meditation is both to empower yourself and to learn to handle 
energy. Power meditation opens the energy centers (chakras) in the soul. The 
chakras contain a lot of hidden energy. Each chakra has specific energies that 
open different areas of the mind. The chakras also give us supernatural abilities 
when open and fully empowered, like levitation, telekinesis (moving objects with 
your mind), and pyrokinesis (the ability to heat objects and set them on fire). 
Many more abilities come with having powerful chakras. 


When all of your chakras are fully open, this creates a free passage for the 


serpent of fire (Kundalini) which is at the base of your spine. When the kundalini 
ascends, we become as the Gods. This is the objective of power meditation. 


64 


Preparing the Mind for Meditation 


It is important to relax both your mind and body to enter a deep trance state 
where your meditation will be most effective. Adepts can often enter this state 
easily; by will alone, even in a hectic environment. This takes time and practice, 
though. Remaining calm, cool and collected in threatening circumstances is one 
of the benefits of regular meditation. Below is a list of tips on techniques for 
calming and quieting your mind and body before entering into your meditation. 


Hatha (physical) yoga exercises are wonderful if you have the time and discipline 
before beginning meditation. The energies amplified from the yoga practice and 
the relaxed state present a medium for focus. 

Breathing exercises can be done to calm and quiet the mind before every 
session. Just tuning into and “watching” the breath is an excellent method of 
focusing one’s mind and entering the alpha state necessary for power meditation. 
Listening to sounds is another way. Just blank out your thoughts and tune into 
the sounds in your environment. This exercise helps to create alertness as well 
as relaxation. 

Sit or lie quietly. Begin with your feet and relax your body all the way to the top of 
your head. 

Be aware of the energy outside of your body for a few minutes and then focus on 
the energy inside of your body, alternating four or five times. Do this slowly and 
take the time to feel. This exercise creates an awareness of energy that is so 
important not only in securing the ability to absorb, direct and manipulate it in 
magickal workings, but also enhancing your awareness of others’ fields and your 
environment. This exercise also tones your nervous system. 

Sexual orgasm is another relaxation technique that works well. Just stimulate 
yourself to orgasm. When opening a meditation with orgasm, use this opportunity 
to visualize the energy from your base chakra ascending your spine and opening 
your chakras. Orgasm naturally opens and cleans the chakras. 

You should be always be well rested when beginning a meditation session. Being 
tired will only cause you to fall asleep and the goals of the meditation will not be 
accomplished. You want to eliminate as much distracting physical stimuli as 
possible, unless of course, one is meditating upon pain or discomfort to 
strengthen the will. Make sure you are not hungry, but not overly full. When one 
becomes more advanced at meditation, trance states can be reached and 
maintained even with distractions. The mind becomes stronger and stays 
focused according to the will. If your mind is distracted by a pressing thought, 
identify the problem and tell yourself honestly to put aside the distracting thought 
in agreement with your mind, that the problem/thought will be confronted and 
dealt with after the session. You must follow through or this will not work for 
future sessions. To the extent you follow through is individual. 


65 


66 


Trance 


A deep trance makes it possible to access the subconscious mind and to 
program it as we see fit. The active left side of the brain blocks out any attempts 
to access the passive right side where the seat of the unconscious is. This is 
analogous to turning off the electricity to a room or a building in order to fix the 
wiring. The right side of the brain is where we can program our minds to manifest 
what we want in reality. 


To get into a trance state takes practice. Remember, each of us is individual and 
some may find this easier than others may. The important thing is to be 
persistent and patient with yourself. Persistence and consistency are everything 
here. 


1. Sit comfortably. Do not lie down because you might fall asleep. 


2. Breathe in for a count of six, hold for a count of six and then exhale for a count 
of six. Do this breathing until you are completely relaxed. Ideally, you should no 
longer be able to feel your body. 


3. Imagine you are climbing down a ladder in the dark. Don’t visualize a ladder; 
just imagine you can feel yourself doing it. On the exhale, feel yourself climbing a 
step or two down the ladder. On the inhale, feel yourself holding still on the 
ladder. 


4. Now, let go of the ladder and free fall backwards. If you get dizzy or 
disoriented, just bring your attention to the front of your body and this will stop. 
This mental falling effect, when combined with deep relaxation and mental 
calmness, will cause you to enter the trance state. 


What is needed is a mental falling effect inside your mind. 
This changes the level of brain wave activity from the awake 
level (Beta) to the asleep level (Alpha) or the deep sleep 
level (Theta). Once your level of brain wave activity reaches 
Alpha you will enter a trance. Once you get the heavy 
feeling, stop the mental falling exercise. If you don’t like the 
ladder, imagine you are in a lift [elevator], feel yourself falling 
on the exhale and holding on the inhale, or Imagine you are 
a feather, feel yourself floating down on the exhale and 
holding still on the inhale. You need a mental falling effect to 
lower your level of brain wave activity. 


5. Keep doing this for as long as it takes. The time it takes to enter trance will 
vary, depending on your experience with deep relaxation and mental calmness. 


67 


A trance feels like: Everything gets quieter and you feel like 
you are in a much bigger place. There is a very slight 
humming feeling in your body. Everything feels different. It 
feels a bit like putting a cardboard box over your head in the 
dark, you can feel the atmosphere change. It’s like 
everything goes fuzzy or slightly blurred. Any sharp noises, 
while in trance are painful. 


6. To bring yourself out of the trance: 

Concentrate on moving your fingers or toes. Once you can move a finger or toe, 
flex your hands, move your arms, shake your head, i.e., reanimate your body; 
and get up and walk around for a few minutes. 


What this exercise does: 

In order to advance in psychic power, we must train our minds. When we are ina 
trance state, our brain waves slow down considerably. There are two sides to the 
brain- the left logical/intellectual masculine side and the right creative/intuitive 
feminine side. The right side is the seat of the subconscious. This is the area of 
the mind that is open to suggestion and programming and the seat of our astral 
power. When the left side of our brain is active in thinking, the right side cannot 
be accessed. Trance states shut off the left side so we can access and program 
the right side (subconscious). 


It takes training to be able to induce a deep trance state. Deep trance states are 
not always necessary, but for specific workings, they are very important. Once 
we train our minds to go deeper and deeper into a trance, this becomes easier 
and easier and takes less and less time as we become adept. The mind is like a 
muscle and for most people. This exercise will be an introduction to a part of the 
mind that has never even been accessed before. 


It is *very* important to never be startled out of a trance state, especially a deep 
one, so make sure you are in a room or area where you are left alone and the 
phone is turned off. Being startled and pulled out of a trance the wrong way can 
be extremely painful and the pain can last for days, especially if you are doing 
energy work in this state. 


It is normal when in a trance state for any sounds to be very painful. This is 
because in this state, our senses are extremely heightened. 


An adept can place themselves in a deep trance within seconds at will. In 
closing, it is not necessary to always go into a deep trance to work with your 
mind. The trance state is used to train your mind. With very important or difficult 
workings, a deep trance is often necessary. 


68 


Brainwaves 
There are four main types of brainwaves: Beta, Alpha, Theta, and Delta. 


Beta waves characterize the conscious waking state at 14 cycles per second and 
up. The conscious mind does not take suggestion very well. Reasoning, logic, 
thinking and putting into action what it already knows is mainly what the 
conscious mind does. Higher cycles of beta waves are used in rituals where a lot 
of active energy input is needed, as in revenge. A good example is in building a 
circle cone of power. The more excited one becomes, the higher the cycles per 
second in the brain. 


The alpha state operates at a lower cycle, 7-14 per second level. This is the 
trance state when the body can no longer be felt, and sounds may become 
painful. This is the meditation and sleep range. Deep meditation descends into 
the theta state. 


In the alpha state, one is open to suggestion as the conscious logical mind is 
subdued. The conscious defense barrier is down. Hypnosis takes place on this 
level. When in the alpha state, we can program our own and/or the minds of 
others. The deeper you go into alpha, the closer you get to theta. 


We can influence others when they are asleep or in the alpha state. This is one 
reason most mages prefer to do their spell work at night when most people are 
asleep. 


Talking to someone who is sleeping will act to program his or her mind. This can 
be done, even at a distance with intense concentration, visualizing the individual, 
and directing thoughts into his/her head. This may have to be repeated several 
times. The strength of your mind and aura will determine your success. Make 
sure the thoughts you place in his/her mind are commands, as in telling someone 
something you want them to do for you. Be calm, but firm and persistent. It may 
take a while, depending on the strength of your mind, but in time, results will 
manifest. 


Psychic experiences can happen in the alpha state. Both daydreaming and sleep 
dreaming occur while in the alpha state. 


The theta state is 4 - 7 cycles per second. This is where all of our emotional 
experiences are recorded and is of the subconscious. The theta level opens the 
door to descend even deeper into the psychic/astral world. While it is possible to 
have psychic experiences in the alpha state, the most profound experiences 
occur at the theta level. At this level, one is able to experience astral travel and 
psychic communication, achieve enlightenment, and enter into other dimensions; 
this is where past lives can be accessed. 


69 


Brain wave activity in the delta state ranges from 0 - 4 cycles per second. This is 
total unconsciousness, coma. 


When in the alpha state, visualizing our desires, as if they are real and actually 
happening will make them manifest in reality, especially if affirmations are 
included. In theory, it is said the subconscious mind believes what it is told in this 
state to be true. Affirmations must be stated in the present tense. The 
subconscious mind does not understand the word “will” as it is in the undefined 
future tense. “Will” never happens. Make sure the wording is exactly what you 
want and look at every aspect, or something unexpected and fated could cause 
things to go wrong. Wording is important and must be planned carefully. One 
woman wished to win a contest. She repeatedly told herself she would be the 
best and went through the entire mental exercises. It turned out she was the 
best, but because of the biased judges, she lost the contest. 


The more intense your visualizations, the stronger your mind/thought output will 
be to act in attracting what you desire. 


Becoming proficient with descending into the Alpha level is usually necessary 


before you can easily descend into Theta at will. 
This can be achieved through self-hypnosis. 


70 


The Foundation Meditation: 
The Breath, 


The Basis of Magick, Energy Manipulation, and Mind Power 


1. Sit in a comfortable chair or lie down on a comfortable spot and relax. 


2. Imagine and will, with each inhale, not only your lungs are breathing, inhaling 
air, but also your whole body is breathing in energy. You inhale with your entire 
body. The breath acts as a focus for absorbing energy. 


3. Know that along with your lungs, each single inch of your body simultaneously 
absorbs energy. Like a dry sponge when dipped into water absorbs, your body 
should absorb energy with each inhalation. 


Since everyone is individual, how each of us feels the energy will be different in 
some respects. 

To reverse this, exhale energy out. This can make you tired and shouldn't be 
done regularly other than to get a grip on how to do it. 


> 


Exhaling energy is for empowering talismans, charging sigils, healing- 
anything, and everything when you want to put energy into something or 
to direct it. 


Energy can also be inhaled and absorbed and then directed to a specific 
area of your body for healing. 


In a very short time, you should be able to feel the energy when you 
breathe it in. As you advance, you will be able to see it without trying to 
visualize it. 


Feeling in this exercise is most important, especially when you are new. 
Do not try to see the energy as this can be a distraction. Just get a feel for 
it. 


This exercise is the most important for working with your mind and 
manipulating energy, which is the foundation of all magick. 


As you advance, you can use this technique of energy absorption to absorb 
energy from the Sun and from just about anything you choose. 


71 


72 


Energy Meditation 


This meditation is excellent for beginners as it gives one a feel for energy and 
sets the foundation to manipulate it. This meditation also strengthens the aura 
when done regularly. 


1. Begin by relaxing your entire body. The deeper the trance, the more effective, 
but this meditation can be done at any time and a trance is not necessary. 


2. Breath in and at the same time, draw in energy from all sides of your body, 
front, back, top of your head and bottom of your feet. For beginners, you should 
visualize white brilliant light, like the sun. Working with colors is more advanced 
and most effective when you are a bit more experienced. 


3. Exhale and visualize the energy expanding your aura 


4. Breathe in again and visualize the energy getting brighter and more powerful, 
radiating from your entire being. 


5. Exhale again and visualize the energy expanding your aura, and the center of 
your body shining brilliantly like the sun. 


6. Repeat this several times, each time visualizing the energy becoming brighter 
and brighter as it increases in intensity. 


7. Now, breathe in again from all sides of your body, top, and bottom and 
compress the energy inside of your body, visualizing it growing brighter and 
brighter, and more intense. 


8. Relax and let the energy expand outwards on its own like water being soaked 
up by a paper towel. 


You should feel a sense of relaxation and freedom with this. 

When working with colors, visualize the color becoming more and more powerful 
and vibrant. You will notice each color has a different feel to it. Colors can be 
used to attract according to their nature. 

You can also breathe in energy from the front and back sides of your body at the 
same time to meet in the middle, then do the sides and top and bottom. After 
this, let your aura expand outwards. 


With this meditation, you can also practice expanding and contracting your aura. 


73 


74 


How to Clean Your Aura 


Cleaning your aura is essential for spiritual hygiene. By cleaning your aura on a 
daily basis, you protect yourself against psychic attacks and illnesses. A clean 
aura is charismatic and will encourage better relations with others. People will 
naturally be more considerate and grant favors to one whose aura is clean and 
radiating with energy. Here is where we influence people and get them to do as 
we wish. Negative thoughtforms used in black magick and generated from the ill 
will, jealousy or anger of others attach to one’s aura and invite misfortune- 
accidents, illnesses and so forth. Cleaning the aura only takes a few minutes a 
day and is well worth it. When one is ill, depressed the aura is dirty and can take 
many meditations to clean. What is within reflects in one’s aura. 


Contrary to many teachings, Satan/Lucifer is the bringer of light. Since the 
Demons have been liberated, their auras have drastically increased in light. Their 
power has increased as well. In some of the old grimiores, certain Demons have 
related their hopes to “return to the light.” Those of us who have been working 
with them understand what they meant by this statement. The light is in the aura. 
The soul needs light in order to have power. Father Satan levitated in front of me 
one time. When he did so, his aura became extremely brilliant in light. 


Ideally, one should clean the aura twice a day- upon awaking and before falling 
asleep at night. Cleaning your aura before you go to sleep is essential. The more 
people you come into contact with throughout the day, the more thoughtforms 
and energy will attach to your astral body and result in problems. People’s astral 
bodies intermingle on a daily basis. Like viruses and physical germs, the astral 
body picks up energy. 


To clean your aura: 


1. Visualize a bright light all over yourself. Hold this for one or more minutes. It 
doesn’t take very long. 

2. Now, visualize the light even brighter and more intensified on each of your 
chakras, like a miniature sun. 


That's all there is to it. If you notice your aura or chakras are dirty, repeat the 


process. This exercise can alert you to any negative energy or psychic attacks 
and prevent them from manifesting. 


75 


76 


Satanic Void Meditation 


"Void Meditation" is what is known as "stilling the mind." The benefits of void 
meditation are the ability to turn off unwanted thoughts and influences at will, 
being able to control your thoughts instead of your thoughts controlling you (as 
with the average person), and a sense of inner peace. Void meditation is 
essential for anyone who practices power meditation, and is important for 
success in advanced magickal practice. Power meditation changes the strength 
of our thoughts and it is very important to be able to control thoughts and to turn 
them off or focus them at will. Thought power, also known as ‘witch power' is 
needed for success in ritual and in using your mind to obtain what you want. 
Power meditation, strengthens our thoughts, and people who are more aware or 
sensitive will be able to notice our thoughts and feelings telepathically. Void 
meditation will train your mind to be silent so others will not know what you are 
thinking. The Japanese Ninja use this technique to avoid being detected while 
carrying out important missions that require one to advance or infiltrate, 
unnoticed. Void meditation trains your mind so you can focus during rituals and in 
every day life so your mind brings you what you desire. 


There are several techniques for void meditation. The goal is to turn off all of your 
thoughts and focus on the here and now. You get your mind to be completely still 
for a specified length of time. In the beginning, this can be extremely difficult, as 
thoughts will come into your head continually. Before you know it, you will again 
be thinking about something. Don't get upset with yourself as this is very normal 
and even for advanced practitioners, certain meditation sessions may not go as 
smooth as usual. Just keep bringing your mind back to focus. Patience and 
persistence are the keys here. It definitely helps to do some breathing exercises 
beforehand to induce a trance state. Some people find meditating after a heavy 
meal causes the mind to be easily distracted. 


Always try to meditate when you are fully awake and alert. If you try to do void 
meditation when you are tired, chances are you will quickly fall asleep. 


1. Breathing exercises are optional. This is a simple method of breathing that will 
induce a trance state: 


Breathe in for a count of six, 

Hold your breath for a count of six 

Exhale for a count of six 

Repeat this several times until you feel relaxed. 


VVVV 


2. Now, get your entire mind to be completely still and free of any thoughts for a 
specified amount of time with no thoughts or music in your head. Your mind 
should be a total blank. You should focus on being in the here and now. For 


77 


beginners, five minutes is fine. Intermediate and advanced practitioners can go 
anywhere from 15 minutes to however long they feel is essential. 


Void meditation can be done with your eyes open or closed. When your eyes are 
open, you will more than likely see a mist around objects as you settle into a 
trance state. This is normal. If you choose to close your eyes, you may fall 
asleep, but this is an individual choice and use whatever method works best. 


For meditation with your eyes open: 

Choose something small to focus on. This can be a point on the wall, a second 
hand on a clock, or even a piece of lint on your clothing. Many choose to 
meditate on a candle flame. The important thing is to concentrate on your object 
of choice 


For meditation with your eyes closed: 

Focus inside of yourself and relax. You can put yourself deeper and deeper into 
a trance with a feeling of falling. This is normal. For people who are new, this 
falling sensation that often accompanies a deep trance can make you feel dizzy. 
To stop the sensation, focus on the front of your body. 


Everyday void meditation: 

Void meditation can be done anywhere and at any time with just focusing on the 

here and now and concentrating totally on whatever you are doing. This method 

works best for those of you who are unable to secure any privacy. Just set a goal 
to focus on the here and now for a specific amount of time each day and you will 
benefit. 


Advanced Void Meditation: 


>» Visualize an object and hold the image in your mind. At first, it will fade in 
and out, but as you progress, it will remain longer and longer. This is 
definitely a needed ability for magickal practice and focusing your mind 
power. 


>» Focus on a specific chant or sound. You can do this either aloud or in your 
head. This is what is known as a "mantra." You breathe in and on the 
exhale, chant a specific mantra or tone of your choice. One common chant 
used in kundalini yoga is "Sa Ta Na Ma." This is pronounced "Sah- Tah- 
Nah- Mah." You can also chant "Sa Tan" "Say-Tahn" 

> or"Say- Tahn- Nah- S-S-S-S." 


>» Focus ona specific emotion- anger, happiness, sadness, love, hate. You 


can choose an emotion going by how you feel on a specific day. This is 
excellent training for advanced ritual. 


78 


> Focus ona specific texture, for example, running your fingers back and 
forth across velvet or a terry towel. 


>» Focus ona specific odor or taste. 


Advanced void meditation that includes adding physical positions trains 
both your mind and develops an iron will, and extreme inner strength. 


1. Keep your entire body still. Do NOT move. This is what the advanced yogis do. 
Get into a comfortable position. Don't scratch any itches, just ignore them and 
stay focused. Muscle cramps may come and go. Ignore any physical fatigue or 
mental fatigue. Just continue to remain focused. 


2. Add uncomfortable and/or awkward positions. Make sure these are taken from 
a Yoga or Tai Chi book, so that they are physically beneficial. This is a discipline 
that is taught in many Martial Arts schools where one learns to ignore pain, while 
retaining intense focus. This strengthens the mind for physical combat and 
drastically increases your sense of self-confidence. This will also increase your 
resistance to pain. 

Many martial arts masters meditate under cold waterfalls, in snow or other painful 
conditions. One's physical health must be built up here, for obvious reasons. A 
cold shower can be substituted. As with anything new, be sure to start out 
gradual. 

These techniques, when mastered, will give one total control over one's mind and 
emotions. If one faces death, one will not freeze up or panic with fear and the 
odds of one's survival will greatly increase. 


3. Running and meditating; focusing on your running steps, increases endurance 
both mentally and physically. 


Power Void Meditation: 

This is an excellent way to empower yourself while doing void meditation. This is 
advanced and you must have a feel for energy and be able to draw it in as with 
the Foundation Meditation. Here you don't visualize the energy, you just breathe 
in and out, absorbing the energy on the inhale and expanding your aura on the 
exhale. You focus totally on the *feel.* You should be adept at energy breathing 
before incorporating this method into your void meditation. 


79 


80 


EZ Chakra Spin 


This meditation only takes a few minutes or less and can be done at any time 
when you can tune in and focus. It is easy to do and can take the place of a full 
or extended meditation for people who lack the necessary privacy and/or are 
short on time. 


Turn your attention to the base of your spine and visualize your base chakra as a 
vortex (like a small tornado). Color the energy a rich vibrant red and spin it. Keep 
spinning it until it spins fast and on its own. 


Work your way up through each chakra, visualizing each one and spinning it until 
it spins fast and on its own. Visualize each one as a spinning vortex with a 
powerful vibrant color- 


1st- red 

2nd- orange 

3rd- yellow 

Ath- green 

5th- rich sky blue 

6th- indigo (Bluish-violet) 
7th- purple 


VVVVVVV 


When you spin the 6th chakra, focus *behind* your 3rd eye, in the middle of your 
head. Many people erroneously believe the third eye to be the 6th chakra. The 
3rd eye is an *extension* of the 6th chakra; not the 6th chakra. 


Each of your chakras should be a powerful vibrant color. Chakras that are dark or 
tainted are not functioning properly. Keep spinning them and focus your 
visualization to restore them to their own powerful color. You might also want to 
clean them if this is the case. 


When our chakras spin at a faster rate, this helps to protect us from misfortune 
and disease. It also opens us to the astral and protects us astrally as well as in 
the physical world. Remember, though, energy work must be done every day as 
each day builds on the day before and until a strong energy field is permanently 
established, short term benefits can be lost or harder to restore. 


81 


82 


Full Chakra Meditation 


To amplify the powers of your chakras to their full potential, it is important to 
meditate upon the chakra at the day and hour when it is at its full power. The 
more powerful your chakras, the more powerful your magick. Research has 
proven that the Ancient Chaldean planetary hours, are extremely accurate. | 
strongly encourage you to download the Chronos program from this website: 


http://chronosxp.sourceforge.net 


You will need to download and install version 2.0 of the Microsoft .NET 
Framework along with this. All of the information is available at the above 
website. This program is outstanding and calculates hours of the planets specific 
to your location. 


| have found from my own experiences through years of meditation, some 
meditations are very powerful and other times- little or nothing. The same goes 
for spellworking. This has to do with the alignment of the planets and timing. 
Each chakra is ruled and influenced by a specific planet. When meditating upon 
a specific chakra, if you do this on the day and the hour of the planet 
corresponding to the chakra, the effects will be 100% amplified. This also 
includes spellworking and the planet that rules over the working, such as Venus 
for love, Mars for athletics or rage, etc. For example, meditating upon money 
when Saturn (limitations, hardships, and loss) is strong, is a total waste of time 
and rarely will the working produce any tangible results. 


The Full Chakra Meditation on the following pages is perfected and extremely 
powerful. 


Each session should begin with correctly aligning your chakra. Instructions for 
this are in Power Meditation Volume 1 in the section on opening the soul. The 
meditation for each chakra is in four steps: 


1. Specific chakra breathing for the chakra you are working on 
2. Breathing energy directly into the chakra you are working on 
3. Vibrating the God-name for the chakra you are working on 
4. Spending a few minutes feeling the chakra 


If you are new to meditation, please read through Power Meditation Volume 1 
before doing any of the meditations in this supplement. 


83 


84 


THE FIRST, THE BASE CHAKRA, THE "MULADHARA” MEANING, "ROOT." 


LOCATION: Base of the tailbone 

ELEMENT: Earth 

COLOR: Red 

NUMBER OF "PETALS": 4 

PLANET: Saturn 

DAY: Saturday 

METAL: Lead 

VIBRATION: NINIB 

FUNCTION: Survival, grounding 
> INNER STATE: Stability 

*The traditional chant for this chakra is 'Lam" or in Tibetan "Lang" 


VVVVVVVVV 


BREATHING TECHNIQUE: 


1. Inhale slowly through your nose, contract your anus and visualize and focus 
upon energy being drawn into your base chakra and with the inhale, draw this 
energy up through all of your chakras to the crown, illuminating each one. 


2. Hold for a count of four for new people, for an average, a count of ten and for 
advanced meditators, however long you feel comfortable. This should be the 
same count throughout the meditation. 


3. Exhale slowly through your nose and visualize and focus upon energy being 
drawn into your crown chakra and with the exhale, direct this energy back down 
through all of your chakras to the base, illuminating each one. 


THE MEDITATION: 


This meditation is best performed on Saturdays during the hours of Saturn. 
1. Begin by correctly aligning your base chakra, point facing upwards. 
2. Perform the breathing for the base chakra for several breaths 


3. When you are finished with the breathing, vibrate "NINIB" several times 
while focusing on your base chakra. 
"N-N-N-N-N-N-EE-EE-EE-N-N-N-N-N-N-EE-EE-EE-B-B-B-B-B-B-B" 


4. Focus upon and feel your base chakra for several minutes. 


85 


86 


VVVVVVVVVV 


> 


THE SECOND THE SACRAL CHAKRA (SVADISTHANA) 


LOCATION: Halfway between the naval and pubic bone. 
ELEMENT: Water 

COLOR: Orange 

NUMBER OF PETALS: 6 

PLANET: Mars 

DAY: Tuesday 

METAL: Iron 

VIBRATION: "NERGAL" 

FUNCTION: Sexuality, pleasure, procreation, creativity. The seat of sexual 
energy. 

INNER STATE: Creativity. 


*The traditional chant for this chakra is "Vam" or in Tibetan "Vang" 


BREATHING TECHNIQUE: 


le 


2. 


Inhale through your nose and focus upon drawing energy from your base 
chakra into your sacral chakra; breathe the energy into your sacral chakra 
and hold for a count of 6. (This can ba varied, however long you are 
comfortable as holding the breath should never be pushed. A count of 4 or 
8 is fine as long as you keep this through the meditation). 


Exhale and just let the air fall out of your lungs effortlessly. 


THE MEDITATION: 


This meditation is best performed on Tuesdays during the hours of Mars. 


A 
2. 
3. 


4. 


Begin by correctly aligning your sacral chakra, point facing upwards. 
Perform the breathing for the sacral chakra for several breaths 


When you are finished with the breathing, vibrate "NERGAL" several times 
while focusing on your base chakra. 
"N-N-N-N-N-N-AIR-AIR-AIR-AIR-AIR-G-G-G-G-G-AH-AH-AH-L-L-L-L" 


Focus upon and feel your sacral chakra for several minutes. 


87 


88 


THE THIRD THE SOLAR CHAKRA (MANIPURA) 


LOCATION: Slightly above the naval near the solar plexus 
ELEMENT: Fire 
COLOR: Yellow 
NUMBER OF PETALS: 10 
PLANET: Sun 
DAY: Sunday 
METAL: Gold 
VIBRATION: UDDU 
FUNCTION: Will, power, manipulation 
> INNER STATE: Willpower, timing 
*The traditional chant for this chakra is "Ram" or in Tibetan "Rang" 


VVVVVVVVV 


BREATHING TECHNIQUE: BREATH OF FIRE 


1. Contract your abdominal muscles, forcefully, creating an exhale, by sucking 
your stomach in real hard and fast. Immediately relax and air will enter the top 
part of your lungs by itself. Use the rapid contractions of your abdominal muscles 
to inhale and exhale with this exercise. The contractions should be rhythmic. 


2. Practice a few times, and get a feel for it. 


3. Do 20 in a row, in and out, using your abdominal muscles in rapid succession 
at the end of the 20th breath, exhale, inhale and fill your lungs, contract your 
anus, lower your chin to your chest, hold your breath as long as you comfortably 
can- DO NOT PUSH YOURSELF! 


4. Exhale slowly. 


The above constitutes one round. The exhalation should be brief, and the 
inhalation should be passive and longer. Rounds are increased by adding the 
number of pumpings with your abdominal muscles. First, try doing three sets of 
20 pumpings and then after some time, increase to 30, then 40 until you are 
doing 60. 


THE MEDITATION: 
This meditation is best performed on Sundays during the hours of the Sun. 


1. Begin by correctly aligning your solar chakra, point facing downwards. 
2. Perform the breathing for the solar chakra for several breaths 


3. When you are finished with the breathing, vibrate "UDDU" several times 
while focusing on your solar chakra. 
4. "OO-00-00-00-TH-TH-TH-TH-OO-O0-00-00" 


a 


Focus upon and feel your solar chakra for several minutes. 


89 


90 


THE FOURTH, THE CENTER THE HEART CHAKRA (ANAHATA) 


LOCATION: Center of the chest 
ELEMENT: Fire/Air 
COLOR: Green 
NUMBER OF PETALS: 12 
PLANET: Venus 
DAY: Friday 
METAL: Copper 
VIBRATION: INANNA or GEBO 
FUNCTION: Emotions 
> INNER STATE: Feelings 
*The traditional chant for this chakra is "Yam" or in Tibetan "Yang" 


VVVVVVVVV 


BREATHING TECHNIQUE: 
ALTERNATE NOSTRIL BREATHING 


1. Focus on your three lower chakras 


2. Inhale through your left nostril for a count of four, closing off the right 
nostril with your thumb. 


3. Switch and close your left nostril with your thumb, and now exhale through 
your right nostril for a count of four. 


4. Hold your breath for a count of six, after the exhale. 

5. Keeping your left nostril closed, inhale through your right nostril for a count 
of four, switch and close your right nostril and exhale through your left for 
a count of four. 

6. Hold at the end of the exhale for a count of six and then inhale through 
your left again for a count of four, exhale through the right and then hold 
for a count of six, inhale through the right, switch and close the right and 
exhale through the left, hold for six, inhale through the left. 


This constitutes one round. Perform the above three times and then continue 
with step seven below: 


7. Inhale through your left nostril for a count of four and focus on your top 
three chakras. 


8. Hold your breath for a count of 6 at the top of your inhale. 


9. Switch and close your left nostril with your thumb, and now exhale for a 
count of four through your right nostril, slowly and evenly. 


91 


10. Inhale through your right nostril and hold for a count of six 
11. Exhale through your left nostril, for a count of four 


12. Inhale through your left nostril for a count of four, hold for a count of six, 
exhale through your right nostril for a count of four. 


The above constitutes one round. Perform three times. 


As you advance, you can perform this breathing more than three times each. You 
should perform both for the same number of times each. You can also lengthen 
the holds, but the time you do this should correspond to the ratio below. It is very 
important to be balanced. 


Inhale: 4 
Hold: 6 
Exhale: 4 


THE MEDITATION: 


This meditation is best performed on Fridays during the hours of Venus. The 
heart chakra does not align as the other chakras. Just focus on the center of your 
chest. 

1. Perform the breathing for the heart chakra for several breaths 


2. When you are finished with the breathing, vibrate "INANNA" several times 
while focusing on your heart chakra. 
"EE-EE-EE-EE-N-N-N-N-N-AH-AH-AH-AH-N-N-N-N-N-AH-AH-AH-AH" 


Or vibrate "GEBO" 
"G-G-G-G-AY-AY-AY-B-B-B-B-OH-OH-OH-OH" 


3. Focus upon and feel your heart chakra for several minutes. 


92 


VVVVVVVVV 


> 


THE FIFTH THE THROAT CHAKRA (VISHUDDI) 


LOCATION: Throat 

ELEMENT: Air 

COLOR: Sky Blue 

NUMBER OF PETALS: 16 

PLANET: Mercury 

DAY: Wednesday 

METAL: Mercury 

VIBRATION: NEBO or NINGHIZHIDDA 
FUNCTION: Communication, self-expression 
INNER STATE: Psychic hearing, intellect 


*The traditional chant for this chakra is “Ham” or in Tibetan “Hang” 


BREATHING TECHNIQUE: VIBRATION BREATH 


1. 


Inhale and with your exhale, vibrate "NEBO" 
N-N-N-NAY-AY-AY-B-B-B-B-OH-OH-OH" 

or "NINGHIZHIDDA" 
N-N-N-E-E-E-N-N-N-GH-GH-GH-E-E-E-JH-JH-JH-H-H-EE-EE-EE-DAH- 
AH-AH 

until you are empty of air 


Repeat the above several times. 


THE MEDITATION: 


This meditation is best performed on Wednesdays during the hours of Mercury. 


ls 


2. 


Align your throat chakra point down 
Perform the breathing exercise about for several breaths. 


Focus upon and feel your throat chakra. It is normal to feel a pressure or a 
lump in your throat which indicates your throat chakra is open and active. 


93 


94 


THE SIXTH CHAKRA (AJNA) 


LOCATION: Behind the third eye 
ELEMENT: ether 
COLOR: Indigo/bluish-violet 
NUMBER OF PETALS: 2 
PLANET: Moon 
DAY: Monday 
METAL: Silver 
VIBRATION: NANNA or THOTH 
FUNCTION: Psychic vision 

> INNER STATE: Intuition 
*The traditional chant for this chakra is “Ohm” correctly 'AUM' 


VVVVVVVVV 


BREATHING TECHNIQUE: VIBRATION BREATH 
First Set: 


1. Inhale through both nostrils for a count of 2 
2. Hold four a count of 4 

3. Exhale for a count of 6 

4. Hold for a count of 4 


The above constitutes one round. Six to ten rounds is ok for new people. Those 
who are experienced and advanced should go with as many as comfortable. 

The following exercise should be done for as many rounds as the above exercise 
and both should be done with the one below following the one above: 


Second Set: 


1. Inhale for a count of 6 
2. Hold for a count of 6 
3. Exhale for a count of 4 


Do NOT hold at the bottom. However many rounds you did with set one, you 
need to do with this exercise. 


Repeat the above several times. 


THE MEDITATION: 

This meditation is best performed on Mondays during the hours of the Moon. 
1. Align your sixth chakra point down 
2. Perform both of the breathing exercises, do the first one first for several 


breaths and follow with the second for the same amount of breaths as you 
did with the first. 


95 


3. Focus upon and feel your sixth chakra and third eye. It is normal to feel a 
pressure or an aching sensation in the middle of your forehead, which 
indicates your third eye, is open and active. 


96 


THE SEVENTH CROWN CHAKRA (SAHASRARA) 


LOCATION: Top of the head 
ELEMENT: Water 
COLOR: Violet 
NUMBER OF PETALS: 1,000 petal lotus 
PLANET: Jupiter 
DAY: Thursday 
METAL: Tin 
VIBRATION: MARDUK 
FUNCTION: Enlightenment 
> INNER STATE: Bliss 
*There is no traditional chant for this chakra. 


VVVVVVVVV 


There is no breathing technique for this chakra. 


THE MEDITATION: 


This meditation is best performed on Thursdays during the hours of the Jupiter. 


1. Align your seventh chakra point down 


2. Breathe in and on the exhale, vibrate "Marduk" 
"M-M-M-AH-AH-AH-R-R-R-TH-TH-TH-OO-O0-OO-K-K-K" 


Focus upon and feel your seventh chakra on the top of your head (inside your 
head). A beautiful sensation of bliss indicates this chakra is open and active. 


97 


98 


Sound Meditation 


The benefits of meditating on sounds are the opening of more pathways within 
the brain. Any sounds can be used for this meditation. This includes any kind of 
music. Close your eyes and relax. Open your mind and try to 'see' the sounds. 
Sounds usually come in motion and in specific shapes, colors, and waves. The 
ability to see sounds is called “synesthesia.” “Synesthesia” is a medical term for 
those of us who are born with the ability to see sounds and/or experience 
different senses at the same time, like hearing colors or tasting/smelling shapes. 
A small percentage of the population was born with synesthesia. Synesthesia 
often fades with age and in most cases, it is pronounced during childhood. 


The experience of seeing sounds and crossing the senses is common with the 
use of psychedelic drugs such as LSD, though drug use induces synesthesia 
through artificial means and it cannot be controlled. 


With drugs, the user is not in control, the drug is, and in self-empowerment and 
magickal practice, it is extremely important for the practitioner to always be in 
control through his/her own natural ability. Dependence on powerful mind-altering 
substances creates weakness of character and creates holes in the aura anda 
weakening of the astral body. | am not talking recreational marijuana use here; | 
am referring to dependence on powerful chemicals in order to reach an altered 
state, as some mages have been known to do. 


People with synesthesia are often very psychic and highly intelligent according to 
medical studies. CIA and U.S. Military psychics reported going through stages of 
synesthesia when performing extensive exercises to open their minds for psychic 
warfare. 

Synesthesia may happen with your first sound meditation or with practice. Close 
your eyes and note the colors, shapes, and movements of the sounds. You 
should write this in your Book of Shadows/Black Book/journal if you keep one. 
You should put aside all thoughts and visions as you would for void meditation 
and try to “see” the sound(s)/music. In time, other senses can also come into 
play- what does it taste like? Smell like? The most common experience is to see 
the sounds, but don’t put any limitations on yourself. 


Natural synesthesia facilitates clairvoyance, clairaudience, and other psychic 
abilities. Synesthesia can be a very beautiful experience and a rewarding session 
of meditation. The more pathways we open and empower in our brains, the more 
experiences, and abilities we are able to have. We are no longer just using “5- 
10%” of our brains. To develop this ability fully, one should listen to a variety of 
music and each day, take time out to listen and “see” the sounds in one’s 
environment. Like anything else, the more we use this ability, the stronger it 
becomes. 


99 


100 


Directing Energy 
From 
Azazel 


To make full use of your abilities in magick, it is important to be familiar with 
energy; sensing it, how to absorb it, detect it, send it out and manipulate it. This 
comes with meditating, sensitizing yourself to it and working with it. With 
consistent practice, power meditation will naturally increase your bioelectricity. 
You will be able to feel this energy often, just by being aware of it. Awareness is 
the key to advancement in ability and power. 


1. 


2. 


Lie quietly and become aware of the energies on the left side of your 
body, then your right side. 

Direct the energy from side to side and then bring it from both sides to 
meet in the middle of your torso. 


. From here, expand the energy past your body and into your aura and then 


contract the energy. You can play with it. 
This is an excellent exercise for directing energy at will. 


. Continue to expand and contract the energy until both sides of your body 


feel balanced. Then feel the energies on the left and right sides together. 


. Feel energy from the front of your body, then the back, repeating the same 


steps as described above. 


. Do this again, this time from the waist up, then from the waist down, same 


as above. 


. Now, feel the energy in your entire body as a whole. Practice expanding 


and contracting your aura several times. 


. The last time, bring the energy together in the center of your body and 


gently expand it out, expanding your aura, making sure it feels balanced 
and even. 


. Meditate on feeling the energy gently radiating and expanding your aura 


for a few minutes. 


It is very important to always direct your energy upwards and out of your crown 
chakra. There will be times you will feel it drifting to your legs and feet. It should 
not remain there for any length of time as it can create problems because of a 
lack of circulation. 


101 


102 


How to Close your Chakras 


This exercise is important, and very useful for shutting out unwanted stimuli. 
Upon closing your chakras, you will feel a sense of calm and inner peace. 
Closing your chakras will protect you from both unwanted humans and astral 
entities as both attach themselves at the chakras. By closing your chakras 
around threatening beings, you can prevent this. Closed chakras also protect you 
from psychic vampirism. This exercise can also help to still the mind when done 
before void meditation as it shuts out a lot of psychic noise. 


1. At the end of your meditations, sit comfortably or stand up (whichever you 
prefer) and begin at the base chakra. 


2. See your base chakra as a whirling red vortex of energy. Visualize either doors 
or shuttered doors and close them on the chakra, shutting out all of the light. 


3. Continue this all the way up with each individual chakra, to the crown. 


You should feel a sense of peace and quiet, when all of your chakras are closed. 
This exercise can be done several times a day if you wish to block out unwanted 
external stimuli and/or to protect yourself in a negative environment like around 
xians or other undesirables. This is especially effective for people who are 
natural mediums and easily absorb energy and for those who are easily 
distracted. Your chakras will open back up on their own after a bit. If you feel you 
need to open them right away, just reverse the above exercise, open the doors, 
and spin each chakra several times. 


103 


104 


Flame Meditation 
Method One: 


1. Light a candle and stare at the flame for 2 minutes. Make sure your attention 
does not wander. 


2. Close your eyes and place your hands in relaxed cupped position, palms over 
your eyes and concentrate on the imprint of the flame in the darkness. The image 
will tend to move across your area of vision. Keep looking for it and bring it back 
and keep concentrating on it for four minutes. 


3. Relax and empty your thoughts and tune into your breathing for a few minutes, 
concentrating only on each breath 


What this exercise does: 

This exercise prepares the mind for one-pointed concentration, which is so 
important to any psychic/astral workings. With the average person, thoughts are 
scattered and dissipate into nothing. With the trained mind that can concentrate 
intensely, the thoughts are single-pointed, focused like a laser, and have power. 
100% concentration makes the difference in astral workings. One's will is also 
developed with this exercise, as a powerful will does not give into distraction. Do 
not become frustrated or impatient with yourself. It is normal for thoughts to creep 
in to distract you in the beginning. Total concentration takes time and is one of 
the most difficult aspects of training the mind. 


Method Two (intermediate): 

1. Focus on the flame for several minutes 

2. Close your eyes and place your hands in relaxed cupped position, palms over 
your eyes and concentrate on the imprint of the flame in the darkness. The image 
will tend to move across your area of vision. 

3. Keeping your eyes closed, try to enter the imprint. You will find the imprint 
begins to compact and change color. The bright image will change to pink, then 
to red and grow dark. 


4. Repeat the exercise if you wish. 


What this exercise does: 
This exercise trains the mind and third eye to direct psychic energy. 


105 


106 


Breathing Exercises for Satanists 


"Life is in the breath." 
Thoth 


The Tarot has always been known as the "Devil's Picture Book." The 0 card of 
the Tarot is the Fool, which begins the Tarot Trump (The Fool's journey through 
the Tarot to the godhead) in many decks, especially the ancient decks is 
illustrated playing a flute. The flute is symbolic of mastery of the breath. 


Repeat the exercises 4 times for new people, for average 8 — 10 times and for 
experienced meditators, how ever many you are comfortable with. Advanced 
meditators can go as many as 60 — 100 repetitions of each of the breathing 
exercises below, but this has to be worked up to with each of the individual 
exercises, and over a period of time. Pushing yourself with these breathing 
exercises can damage your nervous system. A warning that you are overdoing it 
is words and speech getting messed up. Letting up and lessening the time of 
holding the breath and such and this will go away. 


Technique #1 


1. Inhale slowly through your nose and visualize and focus upon energy being 
drawn into your base chakra and with the inhale, draw this energy up through all 
of your chakras to the crown, illuminating each one. 


2. Hold for a count of four for new people, for an average, a count of ten and for 
advanced meditators, however long you feel comfortable. This should be the 
same count throughout the meditation. 


3. Exhale slowly through your nose and visualize and focus upon energy being 


drawn into your crown chakra and with the exhale, direct this energy back down 
through all of your chakras to the base, illuminating each one. 


107 


Technique #2 
BREATH OF FIRE 


1. Contract your abdominal muscles, forcefully, creating an exhale, by sucking 
your stomach in real hard and fast. Immediately relax and air will enter the top 
part of your lungs by itself. Use the rapid contractions of your abdominal muscles 
to inhale and exhale with this exercise. The contractions should be rhythmic. 


2. Practice a few times, and get a feel for it. 


3. Do 20 in a row, in and out, using your abdominal muscles in rapid succession 
at the end of the 20th breath, exhale, inhale and fill your lungs, contract your 
anus, lower your chin to your chest, hold your breath as long as you comfortably 
can- DO NOT PUSH YOURSELF! 


4. Exhale slowly. 

The above constitutes one round. The exhalation should be brief, and the 
inhalation should be passive and longer. Rounds are increased by adding the 
number of pumpings with your abdominal muscles. First, try doing three sets of 
20 pumpings and then after some time, increase to 30, then 40 until you are 
doing 60. 

What this breathing exercise does: 

1. It increases the amount of oxygen in the body 

2. It increases the amount of heat- alchemists in the Gothic and medieval times 


were referred to as "puffers" and the bellows by the fireplace in alchemy 
paintings was symbolic of this exercise. 


108 


Technique #3 
ALTERNATE NOSTRIL BREATHING ONE — HOLDING AT THE TOP 


1. Inhale through your left nostril, closing off the right nostril with your thumb, for 
a count of four for newbies. The best way to do this is to place the pad of your 
thumb over your nostril. 


Eight is standard, and higher counts for advanced meditators who are 
experienced with this exercise are individual, but the counts for the inhales, the 
holds and the exhales should all be equal and in rhythm. 


2. Hold your breath for however long your inhale was. 


3. Switch and close your left nostril with your thumb, and now exhale through 
your right nostril, slowly and evenly for a count as long as the inhale and the 
hold. 


4. Switch, and inhale through your right nostril, for the same count and then hold 
for the same count and then switch and close your right nostril and exhale 
through your left nostril. 


The above constitutes one round. 


Repeat the above 4 times for newbies, eight to ten times, then build up to 20 
times for experienced and up to 40 times or more for advanced meditators. 


It is important to relax and take your time with this exercise. 


For advanced meditators, the times can vary from being equal, for example, a 
ratio of 2 on the inhale, 8 on the hold, and 4 on the exhale, but this must be 
consistent through the meditation. Shorter inhales with longer exhales increase 
the witchpower drastically in a short period of time. 


The above exercise directs the prana/witchpower to the head and upper chakras. 


This is a great exercise if you find your energy pooling in your legs, which can be 
dangerous. 


109 


ALTERNATE NOSTRIL BREATHING TWO - HOLDING AT THE BOTTOM 
With this exercise, the hold is at the bottom, after your exhale and goes like this: 
1. Inhale through your left nostril, closing off the right nostril with your thumb. 


2. Switch and close your left nostril with your thumb, and now exhale through 
your right nostril, slowly and evenly for a count as long as the inhale. 


3. Hold your breath after the exhale for however long the count for your inhale 
and exhale. 


4. Keeping your left nostril closed, inhale through your right nostril for the same 
count, switch and close your right nostril and exhale through your left, hold at the 
end of the exhale and then inhale through your left again, exhale through the 
right and then hold, inhale through the right, switch and close the right and 
exhale through the left, hole, inhale through the left... 


What this exercise does is to bring the prana/witchpower to your lower chakras. 


110 


Technique # 4 

First Set: 

1. Inhale through both nostrils for a count of 2 
2. Hold four a count of 4 

3. Exhale for a count of 6 

4. Hold for a count of 4 


The above constitutes one round. Six to ten rounds is ok for new people. Those 
who are experienced and advanced should go with as many as comfortable. 


The following exercise should be done for as many rounds as the above exercise 
and both should be done with the one below following the one above: 

Second Set: 

1. Inhale for a count of 6 

2. Hold for a count of 6 


3. Exhale for a count of 4 


Do NOT hold at the bottom. However many rounds you did with set one, you 
need to do with this exercise. 


111 


Preface 


When you get your kundalini going, there can be so much energy; you can have 
trouble going to sleep. | have been there. Then, the energy stimulates your brain 
making it even more difficult to go to sleep. This can go on for days and days. 
This has been my personal experience. This is a good sign though, that you are 
activating your kundalini. 

You are heightening your sensitivity and bioelectricity through meditation. | have 
had this sort of thing for years, even when | was an atheist, because of working 
with my chakras and the power meditation | did (though on a lesser level than 
what | received since coming to Satan), yoga and martial arts. 


| feel energy very keenly. | have for years woke up in the middle of my sleep and 
felt electrical appliances when they switched or if they shut on or off, the digital 
clock changing numbers and so forth. The same with the telephone ringing- it will 
send a shock through me. | am used to it. This will also bring a heightened 
sensitivity to noise. 


All of this is necessary and is how we can read the thoughts of others as 
thoughts are electrical impulses. We are sensitive enough to pick up on them. 


| have a human friend who is a Satanist, whom | am very close to on the astral. 
He often will wake me up when he is getting ready for work in the early morning 
hours so we can visit telepathically in the quiet times. When he does this, | feel 
the electrical jolts, same as above and | wake up. This is done at the third eye for 
anyone who is interested. | can even see the balls of light with my third eye 
sometimes and | wake up. 


Satan visited me this morning. When he finished talking with me about something 
personal, | asked him some questions regarding what | have been studying. He 
told me that the chakras are actually pyramid shaped with the four corners at the 
bases, which are square. The reason so many people believe them to be cone 
shaped is because they are spinning and appear as cones. 


There are four sections to each base that are coded in some way. [This has to do 
with the Enochian tablets, which | was well aware for some time are not 
supposed to be used to summon anything, but to open the watchtowers within 
ourselves]. 


He told me to “keep studying” and answers will come to me. 
| believe “Choronzon’” is like “Leviathan” and “Cthulhu,” another word for the 


kundalini serpent. 7 x 7 = 49. They are complex codes of which | will be working 
on deciphering after | decipher all of the Goetic Demon Sigils. 


The “fourth dimension” is a state humanity will ascend to when the earth 
advances to telepathic communication as with other more advanced civilizations 
and worlds. 


This is the true message of the so-called “apocalypse” WHICH WAS STOLEN 
FROM THE REVELATION OF THOTH. 


| can’t reemphasize this enough. When you reach a certain level- TAKE CARE 
AT WHAT YOU DESIRE!! 


*Desire* is the key element of magick. Venting momentary hatred at someone or 
something can be disastrous if this is not your true intention. When one reaches 
a higher level of power, one’s mind and life are quite different from the rest of the 
world. Power must be handled properly. With this power must come self-control. 
You lack the self-control and you will fuck yourself. 


The RHP (RHP is "Right Hand Path" — this refers to xianized witchcraft and 
ancient teachings corrupted by xianity) teaches a false and incomplete system of 
magick based upon the hexagram. The Satanic symbols contain the wisdom and 
the truth of powerful magick. Magick is not three-fold or six-fold, it is four, and 
eight-fold. Satan/Enki’s number is four and the Star of Astaroth has the 8 points. 


The RHP system leaves out the element of desire. 
Fire= Spirit and will (A strong spirit invoking the element(s), energy). 


Earth = The physical body (Chanting, mudra, asana, used to amplify the magick 
and invoke more power) 


Air = The mind and intellect (Using the mind to direct, coordinate, understand and 
know when to release the energy) 


Water = The feeling and desire element (The deep feeling and desire element 
that is the key to obtaining the objective of the working) 


The RHP teaches a lack of desire. This is so the average person will be quite 
powerless. Yoga is from Satan. The meaning of yoga is integration and balance, 
bringing everything- mind, body, spirit, and emotion together as a powerful force. 
In working advanced magick, one must use everything above as a unified force. 
Directed emotion and desire are the basis of magick. 


Athletes who make it to the top have one thing in common- an overwhelming 
obsession and passion to be the best in their sport. This is the average person’s 
mind. 


When one reaches a certain level of power though, a little goes a long way as 
one’s mind is like a laser and can cut through things like a laser so to speak. 
Momentarily and worse, consistently directing emotion at something will bring it 
about, even if the emotion is not that strong. 


Higher Levels 


When we meditate regularly and make breakthroughs, things in our lives 
noticeably change. Noting comes without a price. When we reach higher levels of 
power, our minds and thoughts are no longer free. The powers we have must be 
controlled or else they will create havoc in our personal lives and in the lives of 
others. It is of extreme importance to keep a positive frame of mind and happy 
attitude. Negative emotions, especially out of control can prove disastrous. 


Everyday statements that those who are without make, we are not free to do so 
without consequences. My mother learned of and used her mind powers when | 
was very young. She warned me to stay away from using “Body language.” What 
this means is saying things repeatedly that invite illness in the subconscious 
mind, like “I don’t want to hear anymore!” To the average person, this means 
“Shut Up!!” BUT, to a mind and soul with power, one’s subconscious does not 
have the left side of the brain reasoning ability and in many cases, will work to 
create deafness. 


My mother read to me of cases where this and similar things happened to people 
who had a more powerful aura and soul. 


“lll have a heart attack!” “MY flu” “MY ulcers” - DON’T OWN A DISEASE!! One 
man kept saying “I’d give my right arm if...” Yes, it was a figure of speech, but he 
lost his arm in a car accident and what he stated ironically came true. Now, most 
average everyday people can say and think what they please and otherwise as 
their minds are not powerful and little if anything comes of their thoughts. It is not 
the case with us. Watch what you think and watch what you say. 


As you advance in your meditations and power, don’t be frightened or alarmed by 
unusual happenings in your life, especially when your emotions are involved. 
Luckily, for most of us, regular meditation helps us to keep cool, calm, and 
collected. People who really want to go out of their way to upset us, if they are 
aware to any extent will soon realize this is not a very wise thing to do. Things 
begin to happen. 


Due to centuries of destruction of Satanic knowledge, not too much is known 
about the powers of the mind, from EXPERIENCE. People who had these 
powers learned quickly to hide them and keep secrecy to avoid persecution and 
worse. My own experience is | note, things can be haphazard. | am sure you 
have seen movies of telekinesis. Often, there are twisted spoons and forks 
sticking out of walls in weird shapes and other things that look abnormal. The 


human mind has been cut off from power for so long, when we finally have it, it 
can be hard to control. This is also due to a lack of knowledge on how to direct 
our energies. 


When you begin to affect appliances, cars can stall, electricity can go awry, those 
who anger you can meet with misfortune or disaster- you have reached a higher 
level. There is no turning back. In my own experience, | note things happen if | 
get upset, so | have to be careful to stay calm. Undoubtedly, there will be times 
when we have little understanding of what our powers are doing. It is important 
never to be alarmed or frightened in any way. This is where keeping a black book 
or journal can be of help and knowing what happened to set things off. Satan and 
his Demons are there for us for guidance and support as well and can be a great 
help in these kinds of situations. Above all, remember you are not alone and 
there are many now who are experiencing the same and similar and it is 
something entirely new and very unusual in our lives. 

-High Priestess Maxine Dietrich 


Satanic Power Meditation Volume Two 
Intermediate Meditations 


© Copyright 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007 Joy of Satan Ministries; 
Library of Congress Number: 12-16457 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


INTERMEDIATE MEDITATIONS 7 
Developing Your Psychic Touch 9 
Past Life Regression 11 
Star of Astaroth/Mer Ka Ba Meditation 13 
Information about the Star of Astaroth/ 

Mer ka Ba Meditation 21 
Circulating Energy 23 
Meditation from Satan 25 
Meditation on Satan 25 
Blue Light Meditation 25 
Invoking Colors 27 
The Color Meditation 31 
Meditating on Chakra Sounds by Azazel 33 
Pineal Meditation 35 
Ball of Light Meditation 37 
Secreting Ectoplasm 39 
Ascending Energy Meditation by Azazel 41 
Opening Blocked Chakras 43 
The Aura 45 
Chakra Breathing by Azazel 49 
Meditations for Astral Projection 51 
Aura Empowering Meditation 53 
Single Serpent Meditation 55 
Twin Serpent Meditation 57 
Preliminary Meditations for Invoking the Elements 58 
Merging Astral Consciousness 61 
Satanic Telepathic Communication 63 
Reading the Thoughts of Others 65 
Fighting Back 67 


Intermediate Meditations 


Developing your Psychic Touch 


Several of us have felt and can easily feel Demons touch us. This is especially 
important when one is intimate with an Incubus or Succubus. In order to open 
yourself up to be able to feel the touch of a spirit, the following exercise should 
be helpful: 


Take three brightly colored objects. All must have the same texture and feel, but 
must be different colors. Take each one at a time in your hand and feel it. Close 
your eyes and feel it some more. 

Visualize the color while you hold and run your fingers over the object in your 
hands. Say to yourself in your mind: 

"This is how the color (name of color) feels and | will recognize the color. 

when | feel it in the future." 


The more you do this exercise; you will soon be able to feel each color as distinct 
and separate. It is important to be sensitive enough when working with energy to 
sense different colors. This will also help with invoking and evoking them and in 
seeing auras. 


10 


Past Life Regression 


This exercise requires deep relaxation. Lie down in a comfortable position. 
You should begin by breathing in to a count of six, 

Hold for a count of six 

Exhale for a count of six. 

(You can change the count to four if this six is too long a hold) 


Do this several times until you feel completely relaxed and you can no longer feel 
your body. Turn your attention inside and to your entire backside and free fall. 
Just let go and a falling sensation should manifest. For inexperienced meditators, 
this might make you dizzy. If you feel real uncomfortable or dizzy, just focus on 
the front of your body to stop the free fall. The deeper you free fall, the deeper 
your trance state and the easier it is to work with your mind. 


When you have reached a deep trance state, visualize yourself walking towards 
a door in your mind. As you walk towards the door, tell yourself when you walk 
through the door, you will enter into your past life. This should be the life that 
preceded your life now. Walk through the door; look around at your environment. 


To go back several lifetimes, just visualize the door and tell yourself you are 
going back to whatever year you wish to regress to. To go forward in any past 
life, will yourself forward by asking your mind to take you to a specific stage of 
your life or year. Take the time to look around and ask your mind questions. To 
regress further through each past life, will yourself backwards by telling your 
mind to take you back further until you can regress no more, and again, walk 
through another door, telling yourself you are entering the lifetime before this life 
you are observing. You will be further back in time. To go foreword into your next 
life- use the same technique, only be aware this is only one of many possible 
futures. To bring yourself out, walk back through the door into now. 


11 


12 


Star of Astaroth/Mer Ka Ba Meditation 
By 
Azazel and Thoth 


Sit comfortably, preferably cross-legged, but sitting in a chair is fine as long as 

your spine is straight. Go into a trance state. You should take a couple of minutes 

to clean your aura before beginning this exercise. The meditation is performed in 
18 breaths. 


View from Top 


Visualize yourself inside of two pyramids. 

The standard meditation is done with white gold energy 
inside of the pyramids, but you can change colors as 
you become more experienced and know how to 
handle color energy. White-gold energy is the most 
powerful energy." 


1. With your thumbs touching your 
Sah index fingers, 


> Inhale to the count of 6; 
> Hold for 6 
! > Exhale for 6, and chant either 
aloud or silently in your head: 


S-S-S-S-A-A-A-H-H-H-H; in one long 
exhale while visualizing both your 
pyramids filling with a brilliant white gold 
light. 


13 


Nah 


2. With your thumbs touching your 
middle fingers, 


Inhale to the count of 6; 

Hold for 6 

Exhale for 6, and chant either aloud 
or in your head: 


VVV 


T-T-T-T-A-A-A-H-H-H-H; in one 
long exhale. Continue to fill the pyramids 
with bright intense and powerful energy. 


3. With your thumbs touching your ring 
fingers, 
>» Inhale to the count of 6; 
> Hold for 6 
> Exhale for 6, and chant either aloud or 
in your head: 


N-N-N-N-A-A-A-H-H-H-H; in one long 
exhale. Continue to fill the pyramids with 
bright intense and powerful energy. 


4. With your thumbs touching your little 

fingers, 

> Inhale to the count of 6; 

> Hold for 6 

> Exhale for 6, and hiss 

(one long "S" sound for the exhale): 

S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S; in one long 
exhale. Continue to fill the pyramids with 
bright intense and powerful energy. 


14 


» 


» 


< 


5. Again, with your thumbs touching your 


index fingers, 
> Inhale to the count of 6; IN 
—— SS > Hold for 6 . 
> Exhale for 6, while visualizing both 
' your pyramids filling with a brilliant € » 
white-gold light. ‘ 
There is no need to chant for this step. 


6. With your thumbs touching your middle f ‘ 
fingers, 
> Inhale to the count of 6; 
> Hold for 6 ¢ 
>» Exhale for 6, while visualizing both your 
pyramids filling with a brilliant white-gold light. 


There is no need to chant for this step. Ww 


From now on, with each and every breath throughout the meditation, you 
will draw in and visualize energy entering through both ends of the breathing tube 
at the same time. 


The breathing tube extends for one hand length (measured by the 

length of your own hand) beyond the top of your head, down through 1h 
your seven chakras, and ends one hand length past your base 
chakra located at the end of your tailbone. When you are standing, it 
extends one hand length beyond your feet. 

Your tube is as large around as the circle made when you touch your 
thumb to your middle finger and tapers to a small opening at each 
end. The tube is transparent like glass. 

The next three illustrations below are without the pyramid for clarity. (You should 
always visualize yourself inside of the pyramid throughout the entire exercise). 


7. With your thumbs touching your ring and little fingers, index and middle 
extended as in the illustration to the left. 
>» Inhale, and breathe in energy to the count 
of 6, visualizing brilliant white-gold light 
entering the tube from both ends at the 
same time to meet between your 2nd and 
3rd chakras. 
> Hold for 6. 
The light forms a sphere the size of a grapefruit. 
>» Exhale for 6 and visualize the sphere brightening 
with energy. 


Ah 


15 


8. Keep your thumbs touching your ring and little 
fingers, index and middle extended as in the 1p 
illustration to the left. 
>» Inhale and breathe in energy to the count of 
6, visualize the sphere growing in size until 
it reaches the base of your rib cage and the 
top of your pubic bone. 
> Hold for 6. 
>» Exhale for 6 and visualize the sphere brightening 
with intensity. 


9. Continue to keep your thumbs touching your ring and 
little fingers, with your index and middle extended 
as in the illustration to the left. 
» Inhale and breathe in energy to the count of 
6, and visualize the sphere brightening and 
growing in concentrated power 
> Hold for 6, visualizing and feeling the 
brightness, intensity and power of the 
sphere. 
> Exhale for 6, visualizing the sphere grow brighter 
and brighter, and more and more powerful. 


10. Keep your hands in the position 
shown in the illustration to the left, 
inhale and breathe in energy to the 
count of 6, 

The sphere is reaching maximum 
concentration; it ignites, changing color 
to a white/electric blue flame and turns 
into a brilliant shining gold like that of 
the Sun. 


Round you lips to blow 


Blow on the exhale for a count of six. As you blow, visualize 
the sphere expanding to surround your entire body. 

The smaller sphere still remains, and is more concentrated 
and brighter than the larger one. (Visualize yourself like you 
are blowing up the sphere). 


16 


11. Keep your hands in the position shown in the illustration to 
the left. 
>» Inhale and breathe in energy to the count of 6, 
Visualize and feel the energy entering your breathing 
tube at both ends and concentrating in the smaller 
sphere and expanding out into the larger sphere. 
> Hold for 6. 
> Exhale for 6 and visualize the concentrated energy 
continuing to expand into the larger sphere making it 
brighter and more powerful. 


At this step, you will more than likely see the smaller sphere 


beginning to spin. It can spin either way. Visualize the spinning 
and go with the flow. 


Steps 12 and 13 are the same as step 11. 
(Continue to spin the sphere) 


17 


14. For men, place your left palm on 

top of your right palm, both facing up. 
For women, place your right palm on 
top of your left, both facing up. 


At the beginning of your inhale, move 
the smaller sphere up to your 4th 
chakra (shown on the left); inhale for a 
count of six. 


This is standard for the heart chakra. With experience, you can move the ball to 
any chakra of your choice. This includes the 8th chakra as well. (See illustration 
to the above right) 


15. Inhale for a count of six and say to yourself in your 
mind "EQUAL SPEED" 

The two pyramids will begin spinning in opposite 
directions. The top pyramid will spin counterclockwise; 
the bottom pyramid will spin clockwise. 


Round your lips and blow as you did before, for a count 
of six, spinning and feeling the spin of your pyramids in 
opposite directions. They will be moving at 1/4 the 

speed of light. The spin feels like a pulsating sensation. 


16. Inhale for a count of six and say to yourself in your mind 
"HALF THE SPEED OF LIGHT" 

Round your lips again and blow for a count of six, spinning 
and feeling the spin of your pyramids in opposite directions. 
They will be moving at 1/2 the speed of light. 


18 


17. Inhale for a count of six and say to yourself in your 
mind "THREE FOURTHS OF THE SPEED OF LIGHT" 
Round your lips again and blow. 


As they approach 3/4ths the speed of light, a flat disk 
located beneath your naval pops out and expands to a 
distance of approximately 55 feet in diameter. Visualize 
this like the Sombrero Galaxy as shown in the 
illustration to the right. 

Continue to blow out with force and feel the speed of the disk increase and 
stabilize. 


18. Inhale for a count of six and say to 
yourself in your mind "SPEED OF LIGHT" 


Visualize your disk and the pyramids 
spinning so fast (the speed of light is 

186,000 miles per second) they give off = 
intense white light and energy, hold for six 

and blow for six. This will stabilize the disk. 


al 


It is strongly advisable to remain in meditation, and meditate upon the energy for 
5-15 minutes afterwards. Concentrate on feeling the pulsating sensation of the 
disk. 


Model: Sema-Tawy-Tefnakht, Minister of Pharaoh Psanatik | of Dynasty XXVI; 
664 to 610 BCE. 


* White-gold energy, that of the sun is incredibly powerful. For more information, 
read the book: "Lost Secrets of the Sacred Ark, Amazing Revelations of the 
Incredible Power of Gold by Laurence Gardner. Published London: Element, 
©2003. 


19 


20 


Information About the Star of Astaroth Mer ka Ba Meditation 


Azazel and Thoth worked with me to revise this meditation, which was based on 
the "Mer Ka Ba." Further revisions were dictated to me from Azazel (3/26,27/05). 
Many new age authors write about and teach the Mer Ka Ba. The new age 
version is based upon a hexagram. The hexagram version was given to new age 
enthusiasts by angels. What the hexagram does is it establishes a geometric 
energy field that corresponds to the planet Saturn, of time; the lower octave of 
Saturn. The current system of time, based on the number 3 and 6, is out of sync 
with the vibrations of the earth and the universe, which are naturally 13 and 20; 
the 13 lunar months. Unbeknownst to many, the hexagram meditation is a 
conspiracy and is to the detriment of humanity. It has to do with the numbers and 
this is very complex. | will write a separate article concerning this and linear time. 


The meditation given in this book is based on the eight- 
pointed Star of Isis (Astaroth). The correct position of for 
the Star of Isis is rotated at 22 degrees. Shown at left, in its 
upright position, it is known as the "Sigil of the Beast 666."" 
The Silver Star of Isis (turned at 22 degrees) is also said to 
have been worn by the Knights Templar on a red sash. 
The numbers are definitely Satanic as the number of Isis 
(Astaroth) is 8 and the number of the pentagram is 5; 8 + 5 
= 13. Enki's number is 40; another combination is 5 x 8 = 40. 13 is also based 
upon the thirteen Lunar Months which is the natural year and the eight phases of 
the moon. It is also based upon the Satanic Year. 


Her Babylonian symbol is known as the "Star Disc of Ishtar." 

What this meditation can do is take your energy field to a much 

higher vibration. The geometry of energy has powerful effects. 

Once this meditation has begun, you should continue to do it 

every day until the spinning fields are permanent. You will know 

they are permanent when you can feel the pulsating sensation 
any time you focus your attention on them. Once they are permanent, you will no 
longer have to perform the meditation every single day. 


The eight-pointed star is very ancient and based upon the octahedron. The 
octahedron is an extremely important aspect of nature and is one of the primary 
archetypes of creation for all life. It is based on 13 circles of which the centers 
connect. It is also the basis of important informational systems in the universe. 
Within it are found all five of the Platonic Solids, the”building blocks” of creation. 
The eight-pointed star is also the symbol for the "Shamballah initiation," the 
initiation of advanced Buddhist monks into the Kalichakra Tradition. This tradition 
preceded what most people know as Buddhism by thousands of years and is 
based upon the Tibetan "Bon" religion, which was given to the Tibetan 
Priesthood from Marduk/Amon Ra. Unlike the pacifistic, self-sacrificing 


21 


contemporary Buddhist religion, the original Bon religion was a warrior religion 
where disciples were pushed to exceed limitations and become as the Gods. ? 


Once the candidate was lead through the seven gates and received the seven 
initiations (opening of the seven chakras), it was possible for them to be received 
in the court of Shambhala. * 


* Genesis, The First Book of Revelations by David Wood ©1985 


2 The Black Sun by Peter Moon ©1997 
3 Cloak of the Illuminati by William Henry © 2003 


22 


Circulating Energy 


This meditation is the most powerful. It is done by martial artists and advanced 
meditators. It enables the practitioner to feel, control, and direct energy. 


Be patient. You more than likely will need 15 minutes to half an hour set aside for 
this to begin with. Again, everything is individual. In the beginning, for most 
people, the energy will be slow in coming and will move like molasses, but this 
varies according to one's development in past lives. Normally with repeated 
meditations, it will speed up and you will be able to direct it at will. 


This exercise is more in FEELING, rather than in visualization. 

1. Focus on your crown chakra. Just sit 3-4 minutes and meditate on this chakra. 
You may feel it as a sort of crawling sensation. This is normal. When one 
advances or on occasion, there is an intense feeling of bliss. You may also feel a 
pressure there. 


2. Now, focus on your third eye. Meditate on your third eye for several minutes. 
Feeling a pressure here is normal. 


3. Move your attention to your throat chakra and do the same as with the above 
two chakras. 


4. Move your energy to your heart chakra and focus for a few minutes. 

5. Focus now on your solar plexus and do the same. 

6. Follow with your second/sacral chakra and do the same. 

7. Now, focus on the area between your perineum. This is between the rectum 
and scrotum for men and between the rectum and vagina for women. This is a 


power spot. Visualize the energy glowing brightly like the sun here. 


8. Move the energy to your base chakra and meditate for 3-4 minutes or so on 
your base chakra. 


9. Now, direct the energy up your spine into your second chakra. (This is the 
second chakra located on your spine- with the first circulation, we focused on the 
chakras in the front, we are now directing the energy up the back). 


10. Continue to do the same, directing the energy up into each chakra, one by 
one located in the spine, until you reach your crown. 


23 


11. This time, you can direct the energy without pausing, moving it along down 
the front of your body chakra by chakra until you stop again at the perineum and 
direct the energy up your spine. 


Keep circulating the energy as long as you wish. This exercise will enable you to 
control and direct energy. This is the foundation of all power. You will establish a 
mind connection to where you are able to focus and the energy will follow. This 
can be used for healing, empowering or otherwise. 


24 


Meditation from Satan 


This is the most blissful meditation | have ever done; it was a gift to me from 
Father Satan. This meditation stimulates the crown chakra and the pineal gland 
and it is a most beautiful natural high that lasts long after the meditation is 
performed. 


Begin by "breathing" into your third eye. Do this several times in and out. (See 
the Foundation Meditation for how to do this if you are unfamiliar). 


Inhale into your third eye deeply, all the way back into your 6th chakra. (The 6th 
chakra is behind the third eye and is located about half way from your third eye 
and the rear of your head). 


Hold the inhale for a count of five. (You can hold longer if you are experienced in 
power breathing). 


Now slowly exhale and when you exhale, visualize the energy from your inhale 
as bright light and flood the top part of your head with it. (Your brain area). 


Do this for five to ten times. When you are finished, just relax and meditate on 
the beautiful energy. It is addicting. 


HAIL SATANI!! 


Meditation on Satan 


Most of us have felt Father Satan’s energy. His energy is strong and gives us a 
feeling of confidence and sometimes exhilaration. We can meditate on his energy 
and make it more powerful in our lives. By doing this, we grow much closer to 
Satan, forming a much stronger bond with him. Enter a trance state and feel his 
energy running through you. You can visualize his sigil or any of his symbols. 
You can also visualize his face if you have ever seen him. This is best done after 
a ritual when we invoke his energy. 


Blue Light Meditation 


Demonic energy is blue. Blue is also the color of relaxation. Close your eyes and 
relax until you can no longer feel your body (trance state). Breathe in the color 
blue and surround yourself with a blue light, then tune into a floating sensation. 
The blue light helps to achieve this. Just let go. This meditation can also take you 
to higher levels and other dimensions. 


25 


26 


Invoking Colors 


*This meditation requires the 'breathing' in of energy. You should have 
experience with the Foundation Meditation before performing this meditation. 


Unfortunately, “white light” is overused by many Wiccan and New Age people 
who don’t know what they are doing. These people use white light to the 
exclusion of all other colors, and as a result are not competent in working with 
colors. Because white contains “all* of the colors of the spectrum, they are taking 
in all of these colors and those they are unable to control or work with, are left on 
their own without direction. Each color represents a particular frequency of 
energy that most of us use in our daily lives. If one is not competent in the ability 
to handle each color, the white light often is unable to be used properly. 


White light is easy enough to use and is great for beginners, but the problem is 
that it is overused. White light is great for cleaning one’s aura and balancing 
energies. It is also great for protection. 


White light, when placed around a person, becomes a barrier to interaction with 
others. This is because white light reflects. If you want to be left alone, then 
envelope yourself in white light. Filling yourself with white light on the inside 
strengthens and protects without becoming a barrier to others if you want social 
interaction. 


When an individual is competent and has mastered all of the colors, he/she is 
able to use the white light to its fullest extent. 


Here is more in depth information about the properties of colors: 


Black: 

Black absorbs, conceals, and creates confusion and chaos, new beginnings, 
knowledge of hidden things, the container of light, one of the most powerful of 
colors. Saturn rules black- self control, endurance, and patience. Black is also a 
good color to use to bring discord and confusion to enemies. It can be used also 
for protection, binding negative forces, breaking up obstacles and blocks, 
reversing and breaking up negative thoughtforms. Best when applied to others. 


Blue: 

Truth, wisdom, protection, inner peace, loyalty, occult power and expansion. 
Jupiter rules royal blue- Luck, expansion, abundance, long distance travel, higher 
education, legal matters, taxes, (use with green) investments, foundations, 
prosperity, and opportunity. Spirituality, summoning Demons, healing, inspiration, 
devotion, serenity, sincerity and truth, fidelity, inner peace, knowledge and 
wisdom, harmony in the home, occult power and expansion. Blue can also be 
used in spells, when the color is applied to others and directed for inciting 
depression, sadness, hopelessness, lack of sympathy, coldness, and gloom. 


27 


Gold: 

Great Fortune, intuition, understanding, divination, fast luck, financial benefits, (I 
believe gold attracts larger sums of money. (Use green with shimmering gold for 
money meditation.) Gold is healing, happiness, authority, reputation, honor, 
personal power. The Sun Rules the color gold and the magickal properties of 
confidence, fame, success in gambling, pleasure, securing popularity/charisma, 
increasing health and vitality, healing, protection, success, magickal power. 
Satan’s aura is gold and his sigil in alchemy texts represents gold. 


Green: 

Money, fertility, abundance, material gain, wealth, healing, communication with 
nature spirits, anti-inflammatory. Venus rules green- Love, making love, 
(affectionate; red is for lust/sex), fidelity, reconciliation, beauty, youth, friendships, 
attraction, harmony, financial gain, earnings increases, social functions, 
possessions, riches, indulgence, pleasure and is good for beginnings and 
growth. Venus rules green- Abundance, fertility, success, general good luck, 
harmony, immortality, generosity, material gain, renewal, marriage, balance and 
healing. Green can also be used for inciting jealousy, greed, suspicion, 
resentment, sickness, disease, and disharmony when applied to others and 
directed. 


Indigo: 
Meditation, psychic ability, telepathy, mind reading, spirit communication, 
absorbing knowledge telepathically. 


Orange: 

Creativity, enthusiasm, energy, stamina, orange is a powerful color of signifying 
or creating major changes. It helps with adaptability, attraction, sudden changes, 
stimulation, enthusiasm, creativity, energy, and gaining control, changing luck 
and inciting justice. The Sun rules orange. 


Purple: 

Psychic ability, wisdom, divination, removing curses, healing, psychic work, 
business success, influencing people in power. Powerful color with energies that 
can be difficult to handle. It can be used when applied to others to incite tyranny, 
abuse of power, idealism, and influencing people who have power over you. 
Purple is also used for inciting sadness and treachery in others. Jupiter rules 
purple. 


Red: 

Energy, passion, anger, inflammatory, lust, strength, protects against psychic 
attack. Mars rules red- Revenge, anger, pure sexual lust, and physical 
gratification, courage, determination, dealing with enemies, inciting accidents, 
fires, injuries. Red is effective for self-confidence, athletics, strength, magickal 


28 


energy for Black Magick, intensity. Incites lust, energy, strength, sexual energy, 
dynamism, passionate love, physical desire, courage, will power, athletics 
(especially competitive), and vitality, self-empowerment before workings of black 
magick. When used in black magick, red as opposed to black brings on sudden 
attacks, accidents, bloodshed, violence, and hatred. Red can also be used to 
incite wars, anarchy, and cruelty. Mars rules red. 


Silver: 

Develops psychic abilities, neutralizes situations, repels destructive forces, works 
with female deity powers. The Moon rules the color silver- the home and 
immediate surroundings, imagination, memory, psychic awareness/dreams, 
spirituality, meditation. For psychic related, meditative/hypnotic. 


White: 

All-purpose, balances the aura as all color emanates from white light. Energizing, 
protective, stimulating, inspiring, destroys destructive energies, cleans the aura. 
Provides protection when applied to others and directed. The Moon rules white. 


Yellow: 

Intellect, computers, communication, audio, video, TV, electronics, books, 
literature, the will. Ruled by Mercury- For passing exams, improving the mind, 
concentration, mental power, learning ability, speech, writing, publishing, media 
concerns, gossip, slander, interviews, brothers, sisters, neighbors, rumors, theft, 
all areas of study and communication, also astral projection, overcoming 
addictions, breaking habits. Good for friendship, imagination, creativity (orange is 
more powerful for creativity), inspiration and charisma. Yellow can be used to 
incite infidelity, cowardliness, decay, disease, dying, insanity, and inconsistency 
in others. 


Gray: 
NEVER USE GREY ON YOURSELF! Grey is the color of illness and bad energy. 


29 


30 


The Color Meditation 
Enter into a trance state. 


Breathe in and fill yourself with each breath with a specific color of the spectrum, 
visualizing it as brighter and brighter each time (by brighter, | mean more intense) 
This meditation can also be done after meditating on a specific chakra. You can 
then fill yourself with the color of that chakra. 


If you are new to color meditation, hold the color for two to four minutes. If the 
color feels pleasant, you can hold for a longer period of time. Those who are 
used to the energy of the colors can hold much longer. One’s increased time 
should be comfortable and gradual. 


Each color should be in its pure form and bright. Later on, it is fine to experiment 
with different shades when adept. 


If a color feels negative to you, work with it gradually. Ask your mind for an 
answer as to why. What does the color mean to you? What associations do you 
have with a particular color? This is a great way to find out more about yourself. 
Which colors feel pleasant to you? These are the ones that you may be using the 
most in your life to the exclusion of others. Knowing this provides information as 
to which chakras need more work to bring them up to full power. 


The most important objective of this meditation is to *feel* the colors. Spend 
some time with each color, getting into how it feels. Keep a written record in your 
book of shadows/black book. 


In addition, you can meditate on the color outside of yourself to feel its energy. It 
is not necessary to always invoke the color, especially if you feel uncomfortable 
with certain colors. Remember, if something feels uncomfortable or negative, 
then stop. When you are finished with this meditation, clean your aura with white 
light as this will act to balance the all of the colors in your aura. 


The benefits of this meditation are the ability to feel, direct, and apply color. Color 


energy is exceptionally powerful when used in magick. Each color has specific 
energies and acts to bring results unique to that energy. 


31 


32 


Meditating on Chakra Sounds 
By 
Azazel 


Each chakra has a standard sound. By meditating on these sounds and focusing 
on the specific chakra, this is one way of opening up your astral hearing. 


> Base Chakra, the physical Level: 
Sounds include thunder or a soft hissing. Red 


> Sacral Chakra, the astral Level: 
Roar like the ocean or the sound of wind. Orange 


> Third chakra the level of will: 
H-h-h-a-a-h-h-h sound (silent, like an exhale- no voice; long and continuous) or 
the sound of humming/vibration “aum.” Yellow 


> Heart Chakra, the intuitional Level: 
Buzzing like a bee (bioelectricity) or the sound of a flute. Green 


> Throat Chakra the mental Level: 
Azazel gave me a sound. The best way | can describe it is like twisting a balloon. 
Humming can also be used. Blue 


> 6th Chakra, the soul Level 
The sound of woodwind instruments. Bluish violet (indigo) 


> Crown Chakra, the blissful Level 
Whisper or no sound- this is felt rather than heard. Violet 


The above levels and sounds are guidelines only to get one started. Focus ona 
particular chakra, and imagine the corresponding sound as best you can. Try to 
feel it through your body and resonate on that plane. This meditation will open 
you to clairaudience. 


33 


34 


Pineal Meditation 


This meditation expands intuitiveness and creativity and helps to open one’s 
mind to comprehend information much easier. 


1. Relax and go into a trance state 

2. Inhale and visualize white-gold energy entering through your third eye into 
your pineal gland. 

3. Draw the energy in with each inhale, then brighten, and expand your 
pineal gland with the energy with each exhale. 

4. The first few times you do this, affirm to yourself: "I am breathing in 
powerful white-gold energy that is safely stimulating my pineal gland." 

5. When you are finished, feel the energy for a few minutes, and meditate on 
it. It should be very pleasurable. 


This meditation activates and empowers the pineal gland. The pineal gland is the 
psychic powerhouse of the brain. White gold is the most powerful of all of the 
colors. It is the color of the Sun (666) and this is one of the reasons the original 
religions worshipped the Sun. 


35 


36 


Ball of Light Meditation 


The chakras are located along the spine, but they also extend to the front of our 
bodies, excluding the crown and the base. Each of the chakras, the second 
through the sixth has an opposite chakra in the front of the body along the 
abdomen. The sixth chakra has three. The rear sixth chakra located at the 
occipital in the back of the head, the middle sixth chakra is located between the 
third eye and the occipital sixth chakra. 
To perform the meditation, visualize a small ball of 
bright light the size of a ping-pong ball and light up a 
chakra on your spine with it and pass it to the front 
2 Oe chakra directly opposite it and light it up, then pass it 
back to the chakra on your spine. Keep passing it back 
and forth to each chakra, and then move up or down to 
the next chakra (whichever one you want to work with). 
The illustration on the left shows an example with the 
sixth chakra. 


You can either visualize the ball as white-gold light or 
the color of the chakra you are working with. 


You can also connect the crown to the base. | found the 
energy center located in the perineum to be especially powerful with this. Just 
pass it up and down. 

Now another interesting thing one can do with this is to connect with another 
person and this greatly enhances telepathy. For example, passing the ball back 
and forth from their heart chakra to yours will tell you about the other person’s 
emotional experiences and character. 


To interrogate someone, pass the ball of light from your third eye to his/her third 
eye, back and forth. 


Now, it is obvious you can, with experience invade others’ privacy and this 
includes your own- just something to be aware of if you don’t want anyone in 
your personal business. In that case, close down your chakras, if someone does 
this against your will. 


37 


38 


Secreting Ectoplasm 


Ectoplasm has many different astral uses. Extra-terrestrials use this in a much 
more potent form than humans do. This is the cloud that forms before many 
abductions, where there is a loss of time and memory. Ectoplasm can make one 
invisible and can also be used to kill with death rituals. After proficiency is 
achieved in producing this substance, one can will it to manifest in specific colors 
that are harmonious with the objective of the working. 

The most common example of the use of ectoplasm is with mediums. The 
ectoplasm gives the evoked spirit something to manifest itself in. Ectoplasm can 
also add much more potency to creating a thoughtform. 


How to secrete ectoplasm: 


Ectoplasm is the substance we see with the clouds when scrying. This is a minor 
form of ectoplasm, but it will get you started. 

Candle light is perfect for this exercise. Candle color here does not matter, so 
use whatever you have available. 

If you have a black mirror, you will want to use this, but any other similar props 
will do. You can even use a regular mirror or a bowl of dark or black liquid. 


1. Sit in a quiet dimly lit room. 


2. Relax and go into a trance state. This does not have to be a deep trance, 
just enough so you are focused. 


3. Look into the mirror or bowl of liquid and stare at one point. You should 
eventually see clouds form. 


4. Concentrate on these clouds, willing them in a soft way to condense and 
thicken. 


5. When you are consistently able to will the clouds to condense and thicken, 
gently and slowly take your eyes off the mirror. You should still be able to 
see the clouds in front of you. Try to focus on them for two to three 
minutes. 


6. The goal is to secrete this substance and to manipulate it at will. 


7. Blink your eyes, move your fingers and toes, and gently bring yourself 
back from the trance. 


When you become proficient at secreting ectoplasm, will the ectoplasm into a ball 
shape. From there, work at making it thicker and form it into different shapes. 
This will take practice so be patient. After a time, you can will it into different 
colors for specific purposes. 


39 


40 


Ascending Energy Meditation 


By 
Azazel 


1. Lie down and begin by stimulating yourself to orgasm. Right at the point of the 
impending climax, visualize a fiery brilliant bright light at your perineum (the area 
between your rectum and testicles for men; or between the rectum and vagina for 
women). 


2. Inhale and direct the energy from the orgasm while you are climaxing, up your 
spine. You should visualize this as a bright white-gold light.* Draw the energy up 
your spine to the crown chakra where it lights it up and empowers it, emerging 
from the top of your head and into your eighth gold chakra. Brighten your eighth 
gold chakra. 


3. Expand your eighth chakra into a ball approximately two feet in diameter 
(60 cm). 


4. Exhale and expand the energy from your eighth chakra and then direct it to 
descend down each side of your body, down through the bottoms of your feet 
and back up to your base chakra where you inhale it again. 


5. Inhale and draw it in again at the base chakra, lighting it up and empowering it 
upon entering and then visualize it ascending your spine again and repeat the 
above steps 2-5. With each circulation, you can expand your aura with the 
energy. 


The orgasm gets the energy going and you can keep circulating it for as long as 
you wish. 


Always direct the energy up out your crown. The above pathway is the normal 
pathway for energy surrounding the aura. 


*White-gold is the most powerful of the colors as it is of the sun. Satan has a gold 
aura. 


4 


42 


Opening Blocked Chakras 


There are several ways to open blocked chakras. It is best to do them all and be 
consistent. You can work this into your daily meditation program. Normally, there 
are three major knots. One at the base, one at the heart and one at the 6th 
chakra. Usually, our base chakra is open. A burning sensation or feeling of 
intense pressure in one of the chakras usually indicates the one above it is 
blocked. For example, some people experience a burning in the throat, which 
indicates the 6th chakra is blocked. 


1. Using Energy through Your Hands 

One way to unblock and empower a chakra is once you have a strong energy 
flow through your palm chakras and fingertips, you can apply this to your 
individual chakras. You should feel a tingling sensation and heat radiating from 
your palm chakras that indicates they are empowered and active. 


Place your hand over whatever chakra you feel needs more energy and relax. 
Direct the energy from your palm chakra into the selected chakra for anywhere 
from 5-15 minutes. A warm or burning sensation in the chakra during and 
afterward, indicates the chakra is receiving the energy. 


Doing this regularly will strengthen the selected chakra. 

2. Chakra Breathing. 

Inhale and breathe in color energy into the blocked chakra. The energy should be 
the same color as the chakra you are working on. 

Hold your breath for a count of six and visualize your chakra opening. Most agree 
the best method is to visualize the bud of a flower blooming. Make sure you 
visualize the correct color. 


Exhale, brighten, and expand the chakra 


Inhale through your base chakra brilliant white-gold light and direct it up your 
spine and through the chakra you are trying to open and direct it out your crown. 


Exhale and visualize your chakra bright with the white-gold energy and expand it. 
Repeat the above exercise several times. 

3. Sexual Orgasm 

This is what the old alchemy texts implied. Just keep hitting it with orgasmic 


energy. Visualize a brilliant light ascending into and through the chakra. This 
works well to open a meditation. 


43 


4. Energy Breathing 

Visualize this energy growing brighter and brighter and expanding with each 
exhale. Repeat several times. Eventually, the chakra will be strong enough to 
naturally take up energy on its own. Strong chakras can absorb energy. Weak 
chakras that are blocked are depleted and unable to attract and absorb energy 
on their own. Weak and blocked areas create diseases associated with the 
particular chakra and visa-versa- diseases create the weak chakra. 


Choose one of more of the above exercises and do it/them daily until the problem 
is corrected. 


44 


The Aura 


Everything has an aura, whether it is living or inanimate. The aura is an energy 
field created by the vibrating atoms and molecules that comprise all matter. The 
universe itself vibrates to a certain frequency and the gravity that holds 
everything together is electromagnetic in nature. 


Everyone’s aura is as unique as his or her own fingerprints. No two auras are 
alike. The aura can be used to protect, attract, influence, maim, or even kill. This 
field of bioelectricity surrounding living things can be programmed using the 
power of one’s mind. 

Those who are trained and have an active third eye can see auras clearly and 
discern much personal information just by reading the color, strength, size, and 
shape of one’s aura. 


To see your own aura, you should start out by going into a light trance state. 
You should have already opened your third eye. 

Hold your hand out in front of you, preferably against a dark background. In the 
beginning, you should be able to see some faint lines surrounding your hand and 
fingers. The more you tune into this, like anything, (practice is what is needed 
here), the better you will become. The better you become at seeing your own 
aura, you soon will be able to see the auras of others, by just tuning in to them. 
Later on, you will be able to see colors, layers, and shapes. 


Feeling auras is much easier than seeing them. Power meditation, when done 
consistently, increases one’s sensitivity to energy. Manipulation of energy is 
essential in working spells and magick. To feel your aura, run one of your hands 
over the top of the other, or over your forearm. You should feel the energy. 

You can also practice feeling the auras of friends and family members if they are 
interested in letting you do so. This will develop your touch sensitivity. 


To strengthen and build your aura, you must take in energy. This can be done 
through power meditation. The Energy Meditation is excellent for charging up 
your aura. 

Hatha (physical) Yoga and Tai Chi also help to strengthen and build the aura. 
Both of these disciplines tend to balance the auric energies as well. 


Cleaning your aura is very important. A clean healthy aura strengthens the 
immune system and prevents harmful energies from invading one’s body. Nearly 
all harmful entities are invisible to the naked eye. Energies, as most physicists 
know, can be broken down into sub-atomic particles, foe example, light can be 
broken down into photons. The energy radiated by a powerful aura will burn 
these harmful energies and entities up before they can do any harm. 


Cleaning your aura (powerful white light) is imperative after any rituals involving 
the employment of black magick, throwing any curses, no matter how small, 


45 


spontaneously, or any exercise involving the use of negative or destructive 
energy. One’s chakras should also be cleaned and empowered. This is done by 
putting a strong and intense white light on each chakra. This is needed to rid 
one’s self of any residual negative energies that could otherwise do harm. This 
also prevents rebounding energies. Always take as much time as you need; 
never be in a hurry. Prevention is always better than having to deal with 
problems later on. 


A powerful aura gives health, happiness, charisma, and energy. People with 
weak auras are usually in poor health and are depressed. Our personal energies 
act on our environments and direct our fate. People who have weak auras are 
usually prone to misfortune. 


The aura can be programmed with power hypnosis. Read the page on power 
hypnosis to make maximum use of the following workings. Now, with dealing with 
the aura and subconscious mind, one must always be 100% clear on every 
aspect of what is desired. With love, we don’t want one who is unavailable. With 
money, we don’t want it to come to us through tragedy- this sort of thing. When 
working with the mind as in ceremonial magick, energy takes the quickest and 
easiest route to bring us the desired result and if not every aspect is covered, any 
undirected energy will seek out whatever is available. Color is especially 
important when programming the aura. Below are examples of how we can 
effectively program our auras to do things: 


For example: 

You want love in your life: 

Visualize your aura while you are in a trance, the deeper the better. Breathe in 
energy and affirm several times in the present tense: 

“My aura is attracting my perfect [love/sexual partner, soul mate, whatever]. 
Change the affirmation to suit your own individual needs. Affirm this with 
meaning, five- ten times while breathing in energy. 


To attract the love/lust and or attentions of a specific person: 
Affirm: | am programming my aura to attract and act on ’s, aura. 
He/she finds me very attractive and sexually irresistible. 


You want/need protection: 

Breathe in powerful white-gold light. With the inhale, breathe it in to meet in the 
middle of your body, packing it in brighter and brighter. With the exhale, keep 
expanding it. The energy should grow brighter and brighter. 

Affirm: “My aura is very powerful and is protecting me at all times.” 

This a good exercise to be done on a regular basis, for building a strong, 
protective energy field. 


You want to make a good impression: 
A powerful aura will often influence others to grant you favors. 


46 


Affirm: “My aura is making a very positive impression on .’ If this is a job 
interview, (the person(s) interviewing me tomorrow, whatever). The people 
hearing my presentation, the group etc. Always state this in the present tense. 
The subconscious mind does not understand the word “will” and “will” never 
comes. 


For keeping unwanted individuals away: 

Breathe in white light like the Sun. White light reflects and repels. 

Affirm: 

My aura is repelling, [inspire fear/dread] in , and keeping far 
away from me at all times.” 


To heal yourself: 

A lot of energy is needed for healing. Breathing in energy from the Sun is 
excellent for empowering one’s aura. The Sun also contains all of the colors of 
the chakras in their most pure and vibrant states. The Sun (666) is one of the 
most powerful sources of energy there is. When one is ill, there is an imbalance 
in the chakras ruling the body part/s that are injured or ill. To heal, you must work 
with both the color of the ruling chakra and its opposite to create a balance. 


Breathe in the color of the energy of the chakra ruling the injured or ill body part 
and affirm: 

"lam breathing in (name of color) __ energy that is balancing my __chakra__ 
and healing my. a 

When you are finished, breathe in white energy to balance your aura. 


The auras of others can also be worked with and programmed. 


From reading the above, you should by now be getting the idea and able to 
improvise your own affirmations. 


To protect loved ones: 

Put a powerful white-gold light around the person. For more powerful workings, 
this is best done while in a deep trance. 

Affirm: “I am placing a powerful protective aura around . This should be 
done regularly, and can be done while the loved one sleeps.” 


For inciting lust: 

Put a powerful red or orange aura around the person. 
Affirm: 
: is experiencing irresistible sexual obsession, desire/lust for me.” 
finds me sexually irresistible.” You can masturbate using sex magick 
and drive the energy into the desired one’s aura. This is best begun on a Sunday 
or Tuesday during a waxing Moon. Never do this when the Moon is in the 
celibate sign of Virgo, though. 


47 


For inciting love: 
Put a powerful green aura around the person. Feel strong feelings of love as you 
program it. 
Affirm: 
i is falling deeply and uncontrollably in love with me.” 

is obsessed with me”, etc. You can also use sex magick here as with 
the working above. This is best begun on a Friday during a waxing Moon. 


Healing others: 
Visualize a powerful white-gold aura surrounding and glowing about the loved 
one. You should also use color energy (see the above paragraph on healing for 


one’s self) 
Affirm: “I am putting powerful healing energy into 's aura; this energy is 
effectively fighting the and restoring him/her to perfect health.” In cases 


of serious illness, this may have to be done often every day. Healing others can 
be extremely draining. If you are inexperienced, remote healing is best. Direct 
contact as with the hand chakras applying energy directly to the afflicted one can 
be dangerous. The illness can be absorbed into the healer. To do this type of 
direct work, one must have a powerful aura and work to clean it thoroughly after 
each healing session. Using the energy of the Sun is most effective here. 


Black Magick and Killing 


Killing: 

This is best done while the offending party is asleep. Put a black aura around the 
person, as this will prepare his or her own aura to absorb the destructive energy. 
After doing this, you can vent your hatred. Be sure to visualize over and over 
again with feeling, exactly how you intend this person to die. 

Affirm: 

| am placing a powerful aura of destructive around that is continuously 
working to kill him/her. This work is best begun on a Saturday or a Tuesday 
during a waning Moon. Be sure to clean your aura and chakras following each 
working. 


To cause bad luck and/or harm: 

If your own aura is powerful enough, just sitting and stewing about the person 
should be enough. | have found it is important to visualize repeatedly in a 
relaxed, but angry way a specific misfortune. 


With all workings of black magick, the outcome depends on the strength of the 
auras involved. The aura of the victim “must* be weaker than that of the sorcerer. 
If the victim’s aura is more powerful, the working could rebound as a more 
powerful aura naturally deflects negative energy. Some people just have 
naturally powerful auras. This can come from past lives. If an offending person 
naturally has a more powerful aura, you will be able to feel resistance. Take the 
time to build your own aura before doing any kind of this sort of working. 


48 


Chakra Breathing 
By Azazel 


To perform this meditation, you should already be experienced with the 
Foundation Meditation. 


Relax and enter into a trance state, then, instead of breathing in energy into your 
entire body as with the energy meditation, breathe in energy into each one of 
your chakras, for seven breaths each. Seven breaths is only a guideline; you can 
do more or less, but it is important to keep your chakras in balance. It is 
important not only to breathe in the energy, but also to visualize it. 


You can breathe in white-gold energy (the most powerful) or the color energy of 
the chakra. 


When you are finished breathing each of the chakras, breathe in energy through 
all of your seven chakras, front and back to meet in the middle. 


After this, perform the Energy Meditation. 
Tips: 


This meditation can also be done on just one chakra that is lacking in energy or 
that is blocked. Just apply the breathing one or more times a day. The rest of the 
meditation is unnecessary if you are working on a specific weak chakra. 


Azazel showed me the power of the sun. Most of us are familiar with drawing 
down energy from the moon and other planets. The sun is hundreds of times 
more powerful. The energy of the sun contains all of the colors of the spectrum in 
their purest forms. Performing this full meditation out of doors under the sun can 
give you incredible energy and is very healing. Just affirm "| am breathing in 
powerful white-gold (or whatever color) energy from the sun, into my 
chakra." Repeat this several times and then visualize yourself absorbing the 
energy and brightening your chakras with it. 


49 


50 


Meditations for Astral Projection 


Astral projection is your soul actually leaving your body. This is different from 
remote viewing where you enter into a trance and will yourself to a specific 
location. The following two meditations are just basic guidelines. 


Meditation 1 


This meditation feels weird. Just make sure you seriously want to project, 
otherwise, any hesitation can keep you in your body. You have to be relaxed, 
both mentally and physically. The first few times are the most difficult. Like with 
anything else, consistent practice will make this easier, until you no longer have 
to even enter into a deep trance, but can project any time at will. Some people 
find projecting easier than others do, as they have done this in past lives. 


>» Get comfortable and go into a trance. When you are so relaxed you can 
no longer feel your body, you are ready. 

> Visualize your astral body inside your physical body, being held there by 
your seven chakras. The chakras can be visualized like colored knobs. 

» Take each spinning chakra, stop it from spinning, and give it a quarter turn 
in the reverse of the direction it was spinning, like turning a doorknob. 

> Relax and let go and try to exit. 


Meditation 2 


This is more like a preparatory exercise. This one is not nearly as powerful as the 
one above, but less intense for those of you who would rather do this gradually. 


>» Lie down and relax, as above. Go into a trance. Relax to where you feel 
like you are floating. 

> Now, lift your left astral arm up. Visualize this. You will need to imagine 

this, but energy follows where it is directed. 

Lift up your right astral arm and touch your face 

Touch both your astral hands together. 

Do the same thing with each leg and foot. 

Imagine your entire astral body floating above your physical body, or 

somewhere else in the room and concentrate on being there. Just lie there 

and focus on this for a while. 

> Keep repeating this exercise often and eventually, astral projection will 
follow. 


VVVV 


51 


52 


Aura Empowering Meditation 


This meditation is excellent for extra energy when done regularly. It is quite 
powerful and builds over time. This meditation can also be done outside, drawing 
in energy form the Sun. This seriously amplifies the energy. 


1. Enter into a trance state, the deeper the better and begin by cleaning your 
aura and chakras. 


2. Breathe energy in for six breaths, visualizing a brilliant white-gold light 
surrounding your entire head, both inside and out, down to your neck. Then relax 
and focus on feeling and visualize this energy for around five minutes. This can 
be done while listening to music as this also helps with timing. After this, breathe 
in energy and charge up your crown, third eye and your sixth chakra behind your 
third eye by visualizing an even brighter light on each of these chakras. 


3. Now, move to your neck and do the same. Breathe in energy for six breaths 
and charge up your throat chakra. 


4. Move to your shoulders and charge them up as you did with the other chakras, 
breathing energy in for six breaths and then relaxing and focusing upon it for five 
minutes. 

There are lesser chakras in all of the joints. Move down your arms and do the 
same with your elbows, then wrists. The elbows and wrists contain minor chakras 
as well and by charging up and empowering these; you open yourself up for a 
better energy flow. Now move down to your hands and visualize either white-gold 
balls of energy in your palms. Concentrate and relax on this bright light lighting 
up your arms and hands for several minutes. 


5. Now, move to your torso, do the same, and charge up your heart, solar, sexual 
and base chakras with the brilliant energy. Concentrate for several minutes on 
this. 


6. Now, move to your hips and charge up the chakras in your hips with the 
energy and then your thighs and knees. The knees contain small chakras as 
well. Move to your ankles, charge up the chakras there and then to your feet. 
Visualize two balls of brilliant white-gold light beneath your feet, like you did with 
your hands. 


This exercise should not be done before bedtime as the energy can keep you 
awake. 


For healing, after completing the above, just focus and place the light/energy 
onto the unhealthy body part for 10-15 minutes. Healing meditations must be 
done every day. Skipping a day or more can create a backlash with the disease 
or disorder. 


53 


54 


Single Serpent Meditation 


This meditation, like the serpent meditation, is very 
powerful and should only be practiced by those who 
are advanced meditators and have strong enough 
chakras. Azazel helped to revise this meditation 
with the addition of the extended serpent. 

lk (Like the images from Ancient Egypt with the 
serpent emerging from the third eye demonstrate, the extended serpent is 
a psychic sensor that we can use. It can extend a lot farther than one or 
two feet. This meditation works to empower the sensor). 


1. Sit with your spine straight 
2. Focus on your base chakra, glowing with a powerful vibrant red-gold. 


3. Visualize the serpent glowing with the brilliant light and power as well, 
lighting up the base chakra to white gold like the sun, and exiting the base 
chakra from the left side. 


4. The serpent curves outwards to the left side of the body before it curves 
back to the right to enter the 2nd sacral chakra on the left side. When it 
enters the sacral chakra, visualize this chakra lighting up in orange-gold. 


5. It emerges from the right side of the 2nd chakra, curving out and then 
back in to the left where it enters the 3rd solar plexus chakra from the right 
side, lighting it up to white-gold and empowering it. 


6. Emerging on the left side of the 3rd chakra, it curves out and then back in 
to the right to the 4th heart chakra where it enters on the left side and 
lights it up with green-gold energy. 


7. Emerging on the right side of the 4th chakra, arcing out and then back in 
to the left to enter the 5th throat chakra on the right side, lighting it up with 
bright blue energy and empowering it. 


8. Emerging from the left of the throat chakra, the serpent again arcs out to 
the left, and then in to the right again where it enters the 6th chakra behind 
the 3rd eye from the left side. Light up this chakra with brilliant blue-violet 
energy, charging it and empowering it. 


9. The serpent emerges from the front of the 6th chakra. It will take an 
alternative route. Visualize the serpent entering the 3rd eye from the rear 
and exiting from the front of the third eye. Extend the serpent about one 
foot beyond your third eye and try to feel the projection from your aura. 


55 


10. Retract the serpent back into your third eye and back into your 6th chakra, 
then begin the path of descending. 


11.Direct the serpent to enter the right side of your throat chakra, lighting it up 
and it emerges from the left side of the throat chakra, arcing out and in 
again to enter the heart chakra on the left side, lighting it up. 


12.It emerges from the heart chakra on the right side, arcing out, then in 
again to enter the solar plexus chakra on the right side, lighting it up and 
empowering it. 


13. It then emerges on the left side of the solar chakra, arcing out and then in 
again to enter the sacral chakra on the left side, lighting it up and 
empowering it. 


14. After lighting up the sacral chakra, it emerges through the right side and 
again arcs out and in again before it returns to the base chakra, entering it 
on the right side, lighting it up with brilliant light and energy. Spend a few 
moments meditating on your base chakra and empowering it with the 
brilliant light and energy. 


This meditation can be repeated. 


56 


Twin Serpent Meditation 


This meditation was given to a couple of JoS clergy members 
from Thoth and Azazel. 


1. Relax and be completely comfortable. Clean your aura and 
chakras. 


2. Visualize your base chakra lighting up into a brilliant glow. 
Then visualize a brilliant stream of light rising from this glowing 
chakra. The stream of light will then connect with your second 
chakra, lighting it up into a brilliant glow. Do this, connecting each 
chakra and lighting it up all the way to the crown. You may also 
want to connect your gold chakra above your head (this is 
optional). 


3. Expand the stream of light into a staff. Visualize the pole spinning. Spin faster 
and faster. The staff should be glowing brilliantly. Now, command the pole to spin 
at the speed of light. 


4. Focus at the base chakra again, glowing in a ball of brilliant light. From this 
base, two serpents will emerge. Each will move outwards in opposite directions, 
just like in the caduceus (shown above) and then turn back inwards to connect 
with each other at the second (sexual) chakra, lighting it up. 


5. The serpents move back outwards again and then inwards to connect with the 
third (solar) chakra, lighting it up. 


6. Moving back outwards, they then turn in at the heart chakra and do the same. 
Continue this all the way to the crown or 8th and 9th chakras. 


7. Now, go back and spin the staff at the speed of light. 


8. Now, return to the serpent if you wish to do another round and repeat. 


57 


Preliminary Meditations for Invoking the Elements 


In order to really become adept, one must master the elements. This is also the 
message of the Mage card of the Tarot. You must be healthy to invoke the 
elements. For those of you who wish to go slowly, these preliminary meditations 
can help: 


For Fire: 


1. Sit quietly and relax. 


2. Visualize a large bonfire. *Hear* the crackling and “feel* the heat, then *smell* 
the heat. 
Do this for five minutes. 


For Water: 
1. Sit quietly and relax. 


2. Visualize yourself wading in water. This can be a lake, the river or the ocean. 
*Feel* the water, *hear* the water and *smell* the water, like you are actually 
there. 

Do this for five minutes. 


For Earth: 

1. Sit quietly and relax. 

2. Visualize yourself walking barefoot on the earth. This is best if you can visulize 
yourself walking on soil in a farm field as this is very close to the element of 
earth. *Feel* the soil under your bare feet and *hear* and *feel* the light breeze 
through the air and *smell* the earth. 

Do this for five minutes. 

For Air: 

1. Sit quietly and relax. 

2. Visualize yourself walking against the wind. *Feel* the wind blow against your 
skin and the roar of the wind in your ears. *Smell* the fresh air as it blows against 


you. Feel each step walking into the wind. 
Do this for five minutes. 


58 


Next Step for Fire: 
1. Sit quietly and relax. 


Visualize yourself walking through the desert. *Feel* the searing heat and the dry 
hot wind in the scorching environment. Feel the sand beneath your feet and your 
body growing hotter. 

Do this exercise for three to four minutes and no longer. 


Next Step for Water: 
1. Sit quietly and relax. 


Visualize yourself in a cold environment. Feel yourself getting cold. Feel the cold 
wind blow on your skin. For those of you who know snow (some brothers and 
sisters live in tropical environments, so not everyone has experienced snow), 
visualize yourself in snow and ice. Hear the crunching of the snow beneath your 
feet. For those of you who have never experienced snow- just visualize yourself 
in a cold environment and use all of your astral senses. 

Do this exercise for three to four minutes and no longer. 


What the above exercises do: 

In addition to strengthening your astral senses, these exercises will introduce you 
to working with the four elements of earth, air, fire and water. By invoking these 
elements, we can strengthen ourselves to where we will be able to withstand 
incredible amounts of heat, cold and other extremes. Invoking and directing fire is 
a very important aspect of pyrokinesis. With invoking the fire element, we can 
keep warm or with the water element, cool if circumstances call for this. 
Invocation of fire is how the Tibetan monks spent the nights of their initiation in 
the ice cold mountains, naked under in a wet sheet in a snow storm. In the 
morning, if the initiate passed, the sheet was warm and dry and the snow and ice 
were melted in the surrounding area. 


Some 1920's-30's Satanic Lodges in Germany used the element of fire for 
assassination. The element when invoked and directed to the victim would make 
the victim's blood literally boil. 


The air element, when invoked properly, produces levitation. Through invocation 
and proper direction of the elements, we can also influence the weather. 


The foundation of advanced magick is through the control of the elements, this 
includes healing and all aspects of magick, white, black, and grey. 


59 


60 


Merging Astral Consciousness 


*When you are finished with merging with a human being or animal, be sure to 
clean your aura and chakras thoroughly as their thoughts or beliefs can rub off on 
you. Always choose a healthy being when you are new to this, be it a plant or a 
human being. 


Meditation One 


1. Choose an object, this can be a crystal, a table- anything in your room. 
Beginners should start with an object that is a single material, like a rock or 
playing dice. 


2. Get comfortable and go into a trance state. 


3. Look at the object in front of you for a minute or two and then close your eyes. 
Visualize the object. 


4. Now enlarge the object so it is big enough for you to walk into in your mind and 
enter it. 


5. Become one with the object and open your astral senses. What do you see, 
hear, smell, feel? Is it cold or warm inside? What sensations do you feel? If the 
object is on a table or hard surface, *feel* that surface. 


Meditation Two: 


Do the same as the above, only this time use a plant. This can be a tree or even 
a blade of grass. If you don't have any house-plants, you might want to do this 
exercise out of doors. It is important that the plant be alive. 


With the plant exercise, *feel* the earth through the roots of the plant. How does 
this plant feel in relation to other plants around it if out of doors? 


Meditation Three: 


Now, do the same as the above, but this time merge with an animal. You can 
visualize this animal if you are not near any animals. If you have pets, then 
choose one of your pets and merge with your pet. See through his/her eyes, hear 
through his/her ears; feel the floor or ground beneath his/her feet. How does your 
pet's body feel? Is your pet warm? Cold? Hungry? What does your pet smell in 
the environment? Use his/her nose. What is in your pet's mind? Animals think in 
visions. 


61 


Meditation Four: 


Now, do the above with a person you know. You can choose a different person 
each day. Think with their mind. 


What the above exercises do: 
Plenty. They are *very* important. When mastered, the above exercises will give 
you skills to 


> Shapeshift 

> Communicate with animals 

> Plant thoughts in the minds of others and to even possess them 

> Fix electrical equipment and appliances- you can find the problem by 
merging with the item. 

> Pull thoughts out of the minds of others and obtain information 

>» Diagnose diseases in humans and animals 

>» Students can use this to merge with their teachers to find what questions 
will be posted on an important exam 


62 


Satanic Telepathic Communication 


Father Satan showed me this technique. 
To open telepathic communication between two people: 


1. Open your third eye (you should have already performed the opening of the 
third eye foundation exercise). 

To open your third eye, visualize a bright light about the size of a quarter, shining 
like the sun. This will activate your third eye. 


2. Visualize the face of the person whom you wish to communicate with and 
open their third eye by visualizing it brightening, the same as you did with your 
own. In some cases, those who do not have their third eye open may be able to 
receive your messages, but for best results, both people should be fully open. 


3. Extend your third eye serpent. 
To extend the third eye serpent, visualize a bright thin tube-like extension 
projecting from your third eye. 


4. Connect your serpent to the third eye of the one whom you wish to 
communicate with, brightening both third eyes with energy as well as the tube. 


Telepathic communication should be established. Talk as you would in 
communicating with Demons. The other person should hear you and respond. 
This is not for newbies. You should already be experienced with communicating 
with Demons and able to discern real messages and communication from astral 
deception. 


63 


64 


Reading the Thoughts of Others and Getting into Their Heads 
1. Go into a trance 
2. Invoke the element of ether/akasha 


3. Concentrate on the *spirit* of the person you wish to read. Just tune in and the 
spirit should appear to you 


| have found in this exercise, the spirit is the light body of the soul and in my own 
experience; it was just the shape of the individual, like the auric energy field filled 
with light. This is different from the astral body that mirrors the physical body, 
with the distinct head, eyes, features, and so forth. The spirit is only a body of 
light and in some individuals, it is darker. This has been my own personal 
experience with this technique and should only be used as a guide. 


65 


66 


Fighting Back 


One of the most important reasons we clean our auras is to get off all of the 
negative energy that we encounter on a daily basis. Much of this comes from 
others in our immediate environment. The workplace can be especially 
troublesome as well as the home for many. Negative people include those who 
forever whine and complain, but do nothing to try to alleviate their situations, 
those who are forever putting others down to make themselves feel better or to 
divert their attentions from their own personal worthlessness, those who blame 
everyone else for their woes, those who take out their anger and frustrations 
through abusing others and the list goes on and on. 


Satanists do not take abuse. 


There is a very simple meditation one who is experiencing the effects of 
another’s negative output can do: 


1. Clean your aura and chakras thoroughly, as you do not want to trap in any 
negative energy 


2. Expand your consciousness to your aura and *feel* your aura 
3. Relax and tune into your aura 


4. Visualize your aura as an outline and protective barrier. The outline should be 
brilliant white light like the Sun because white light deflects everything. 


5. State this affirmation: “My aura is powerfully and totally deflecting __ (name of 
offender)’s negative energy in every way and sending it directly back to 
him/her. “ 


This meditation should be done with intent and then repeated when you come 
into contact with the offensive asshole. Just visualize and feel your aura, same 
as above and repeat the affirmation a couple of times and watch the asshole’s 
negativity destroy him/her. 


No Satanist should ever have to put up with or take abuse. The average person 
absorbs the negative energy and suffers accordingly after the negativity has built 
up. The offending asshole benefits by venting hostility or negativity on others and 
often thrives on it. The people who unknowingly absorb the energy can suffer 
anything from depression to illness and get caught in a vortex of negative energy, 
while providing the asshole with a negative outlet. The above meditation puts a 
dead stop to this, but remember, it must be reinforced frequently. 

In addition to the above, visualize the negative energy the offender is sending 
out, grey in color, and direct it right back to his/her aura, clinging to it. Remember 
to clean your aura afterwards. 


67 


68 


69 


Table of Contents 


Chakra Activity 
Chant and Vibration 
The Bandhas 
Drawing in Energy 


PART | 
THE ELEMENTS 


Invoking the Elements 

Fire 

Earth 

Air 

Water 

Akasha/Quintessence 

Condensing the Elements 

Evoking the Elements 

The Chariot of RA and the Rotation of the Chi 
Rotating the Elements 

Breath of Fire 

More Information about the Elements 


PART II 
ADVANCED MEDITATIONS 


Expanding the Sushumna 
Telekinesis 

Pyrokinesis 

Advanced Chakra Spinning 
Spinning Energy Fields Meditation 
Satanic Healing 

How to Detach Unwanted People/Entities 
from Your Aura 

Freeing the Soul 

Meditation on the Spirit 

Kundalini Meditation 

Splitting the Soul 


PART III 
ADVANCED EMPOWERING OF THE CHAKRAS 


Opening the Watchtowers 


PART IV 
THE NECRONOMICON MEDITATIONS 


ONUW 


Chakra Activity 


Our chakras have hours where they are more active, every day. These 
correspond to the four cardinal points of the soul and the seven days of the 
week. Many of the old magickal texts mention these in the form of the planets. 
Each chakra corresponds to a specific planet and day of the week. The times of 
peak activity are important as we can use these times to meditate or work ona 
specific chakra or use the energies in rituals. The times listed in table below are 
of the 24-hour clock. For those of you who unfamiliar with this: 


13:00= 1 pm 17:00= 5 pm 21:00= 9 pm 
14:00= 2 pm 18:00= 6 pm 22:00= 10 pm 
15:00= 3 pm 19:00= 7 pm 23:00= 11 pm 
16:00= 4 pm 20:00= 8 pm 


Hours Sunday Monday | Tuesday | Wednesday | Thursday | Friday | Saturday 
Midnight Heart Crown Eid Sixth Chakra tied Throat Seiad 
sha Paroet ears auc adil aa ae bane 
2:00 peal Baia Throat Base Chakra Pena Crown Poerad 
a) Crom ae ats eines ee fare tia 
oy Ghats aes eli Chains ‘Ebroat pores ae 
sii are Pheer ca. are eon en Crowe 
oe ae ren eae ‘Throat Com ee oe 
7:00 dicart | crown | Gytird | sixth Chakra} P&S° | Throat | Second 
sized Taross een as one oe eval a 
9:00 Baas pide Throat Base Chakra ee Crown Rene 
ad said a eae pare a Lane ahroet 
ron ae ren indi Gas Tost see aa a 
Noon Second Throat Base Heart Sixth Third Crawn 
Chakra Chakra Chakra Chakra Chakra 
load Gas can an ‘Throat ronm ae ae 


3 


14:00 Baal Crown aL. Sixth Chakra Ban Throat bora 
Hours Sunday Monday | Tuesday | Wednesday | Thursday | Friday | Saturday 
1Ss00 aro ae Gee Crown poe ani Gas 
16:00 aed pea Throat Base Chakra aa Throat Facil 
ad oom eee cae stern nee hae Tear 
18:00 | chakra | Chakra | ™" | Chakra | Throat | Crown | ska 
19:00 | Chawra | THM | Chakra | Chakra | Chakra | Chakra | CFO" 
20:00 | Chakra | Chakra | Chanen | Throat | Crown | Chien | Chara 
21:00 | Chakra | "| Chakra (Sit Chakra | Chakra | Chakra | Chakra 
ae Theos en cain Crown fans aa cule 
23:00 Besar eh ptas Throat Base Chakra Ree Throat Leia 


Chant and Vibration 


The entire universe vibrates to the tune of a certain frequency. Everything is 
composed of vibrating molecules that are on tuned into a certain frequency. The 
world powers are aware of this, and certain departments of the government have 
experimented with these frequencies. Sounds we cannot normally hear can 
affect our thoughts moods and emotions, also our psychic and physical selves. 


Our chakras are very sensitive to vibration, and specific chants relative to each 
chakra stimulate the chakra beyond visualizing and breathing techniques. With 
each chakra, the tone of the chant should get higher; beginning with the root 
chakra where the chanting is in low tone, (The crown chakra is soundless). 
Chanting does much in stimulating and opening the chakras. 


Vibrating and chanting God names is also very powerful. We can chant the 
names of Satan and the Demons, visualizing their colors, and focusing on the 
attributes of the certain Demons, that we wish to obtain for ourselves. Sigil 
visualization is also very powerful. The Enochian Keys are very powerful when 
chanted in monotone during ritual. 


Chanting brings more power to workings. Sound can break glass or turn one's 
insides into jello, killing them instantly; this is the power of sound. Chanting the 
name of a hated one in the correct tone while torturing a poppet, adds power to 
the working. Our minds, when trained, send out strong electrical impulses, 
vibrating waves of molecules into a thought form that is directed/sent during ritual 
through intense focus. Adding sound intensifies the thought form. 


Bandhas 


Most websites and books go into too much detail concerning the bandhas. The 
following is a basic summary: 

The word "bandha means to "lock" or "bind." When the bandhas are applied 
during breathing exercises or when chanting, they act to amplify energy and/or 
direct it. 


There are three main bandhas. 


Two are the most powerful: 
the "Moola bandha" and the Jalandahara bandha." 


The Moola Bandhas also known as the "Root Lock." This is applied by 
contracting your anus. 


The Jalandahara Bandhas also known as the "Chin Lock." This is applied by 
dropping the chin to the chest. 

Both the Root and Chin Locks can be done at the same time after inhaling, while 
holding the breath. One should remain motionless while applying and holding the 
locks. 


The third major lock is the "Uddiyana Bandha" also known as "The Abdominal 
Lift." 

This is applied when holding an exhale, after exhaling completely. To exhale 
totally, when all of your air is out of your lungs, try humming and this will get the 
last of the breath out. 

To apply the Abdominal Lift; lungs completely empty, suck in your abdomen and 
lift it up. This bandha should be applied as long as the exhale lasts. 


Drawing in Energy 


Once you are advanced, you will no longer have to “breathe” in energy. You can 
just direct it with your will, by using your mind. The easiest way to start out is by 
willing energy through the front of your body as you would by breathing with the 
energy meditation. The Energy Meditation, Pineal Meditation, and Chakra 
Breathing Meditation are excellent for training yourself to absorb energy using 
only your mind. Just focus and follow the meditation, but do not include the 


breathing in to draw in the energy. Just enter into a trance, breathe normally, and 
be relaxed. 


10 


Part | 
The Elements 


12 


Invoking the Elements 


Invoking the elements is very advanced and can be very dangerous. | am 
speaking from experience here. Many authors write from a theoretical and 
scholastic prospective and have not had the direct experience with certain 
meditations and psychic practices. | am going to give you *my* personal 
experiences with the meditations that follow. Remember- THESE ARE MY OWN 
DIRECT EXPERIENCES AND SOME OF WHAT | EXPERIENCED, YOU MAY 
OR MAY NOT AS WE ARE INDIVIDUALS, BUT THESE MEDITATIONS *ARE* 
HIGHLY EFFECTIVE, POWERFUL AND DANGEROUS. 


If you: 


> Are not physically and/or mentally healthy 

If you take *any* psychiatric medications or medications that affect your 
brain/nervous system 

If you suffer from High Blood Pressure 

If you have heat flashes from menopause 

If you suffer bouts of depression 

If you do not know yourself 100% 

If you are pregnant 


Vv 


VVVVV 


| strongly encourage you to work at other meditations that are safer. Once you 
have overcome any problems mentioned above using safer meditations, you can 
proceed at a very slow pace if you think you are ready. Let me explain: 


With invoking the elements, here are some examples of what can happen: 


Invoking fire will make you hot. Depending on how many breaths you do (only 
seven and under are recommended for those who have not had experience with 
this element). Even with adepts, 20 breaths can be extreme. While you are doing 
the fire meditation for the first time, more than likely while you are doing it, you 
will feel little or nothing. DO NOT MAKE THE MISTAKE OF DOING ANY MORE 
BREATHS BECAUSE YOU MIGHT FEEL NOTHING! You will feel the effects 
hours later. The effects of invoking fire include a fever, feeling BURNING HOT 
after a warm glow/aura manifests, insomnia and since water is the opposite of 
fire, you can get a backlash of water and this can manifest in depression. These 
effects can last several hours to several days. Each one of us has imbalances of 
certain elements and invoking the elements can cause even more imbalance so 
it is also important to know your strengths and weaknesses in certain elements. 


Invoking air can over stimulate the nervous system. Air can make you very 
irritable and oversensitive for a few hours to several days, depending on how 
much you take in. 

| have always been a person of extremes and | am daring, so | have never put 
any limitations on myself with meditations, though | have always used common 
sense. Now, with invoking these elements over a period of time, we become 


13 


resistant to extremes of temperature, we can warm or cool our bodies at will and 
we can be adept at pyrokinesis, cryokinesis and other astral disciplines. 


If you are planning to do the elemental meditations, | strongly encourage you to 
keep written entries in a black book or journal regarding how these exercises 
affect you. Mastering the elements is one of the highest forms of magick, while 
others play around with props. The elements are based upon the four corners 
and directions. They are the foundation of the universe when working magick. 
Invoking and directing the elements is used to empower sigils and talismans. 
Each ritual or working normally has an elemental theme. By making use of the 
elements, the power of any working is drastically amplified. Elemental magick is 
extremely advanced and powerful magick. 


There are two ways of invoking the elements. One way is total invocation as | 
have done (no breathing them back out and the most dangerous) and the other 
way is easier is to breathe the element back out into the ether. You can work up 
from this. 


Each one of us has strengths and weaknesses with certain elements. Nearly all 
of us have imbalances of the elements in our souls. The following meditations will 
correct these. 


Several hours or a day after invoking an element, sit quietly and meditate on how 
you feel. How did you feel during the past 24 hours? It is important to be able to 
*“feel* the elements in order to direct and control them. 


To properly invoke, direct, and control the elements, you must be balanced in all 
of the elements. Most of us have imbalances. These can usually be seen in our 
astrology charts. 

You must be honest with yourself and know yourself. The articles below in the 
advanced section reveal the elements in their pure form. Very few of us are 
imbalanced with just one element; usually there are two that are dominant. Look 
to the elements where most of the characteristics describe you. By balancing 
your elements, you will find healing physically, psychologically, at the soul level 
and mentally. 


Fire is opposite Water and Air is opposite Earth. The opposite element is what is 


needed to fix the imbalance. It is important to be aware that invoking the lacking 
element can create a temporary backlash in the over-dominant element. 


14 


Fire 


The Characteristics of Fire: 

Self-centered, confident, enthusiastic, expressive, bold, subjective, expansive, 
out-going, extroverted, insensitivity to others, impulsive, impatient, creative, vain, 
extravagant, reckless, passionate, self-important, exhibitionist, courageous, 
adventuresome. 


People who have pronounced fire often burn themselves out. They are often 
over-active, restless, and over concerned with making something happen in the 
world. There are often problems in dealing with others; they can be very 
insensitive and crude in their approach. Fire people are prone to inflammation, 
high blood pressure and can be labeled as "hot headed" as they normally have 
short tempers. Without the element of earth, people who are dominant in fire lack 
staying power. 


A LACK OF FIRE: People who lack fire usually have low energy; they lack self- 
esteem, and self-confidence. There is a lack of spiritedness, lack of enthusiasm, 
aversion to challenges; there is apathy toward living, major problems take a long 
time to overcome with lingering psychological scars. 


Fire alleviates mental depression and brings a love of life. Fire is the creative 
principle, the spark of life. Fire rules competition, athletics, action, courage, self- 
confidence, charisma, and pyrokinesis. Invoking and directing fire is the 
advanced aspect of pyrokinesis. 


TO INVOKE FIRE, go into a light to medium trance and visualize yourself in the 
middle of a large sphere of fire. Now, do the energy breathing. Breathe in the fire 
from all sides of your body, front, back, top of your head and bottom of your feet. 
Imagine and feel yourself getting burning hot. Do this for seven breaths AND 
ONLY SEVEN BREATHS! DO NOT DO ANY MORE! YOU CAN EVEN DO AS 
LITTLE AS 2 - 3 BREATHS, BUT NO MORE THAN SEVEN! 


You have two options for this exercise: 


1. You can breathe the fire back out into the ether after each inhalation and even 
breath it out some more when you are finished with the seven breaths (This is 
the safest way) OR 


2. You can retain the fire. With retention of the elements, you will progress faster, 
understand how each element feels, affects you, and increase your ability to 
handle each element, but remember- this is not for everyone. It is better to take 
things slower and use caution. Always remember to use common sense. 


To be adept, one must master blowing (directing the exhale) the element out, as 

we will in following meditations. For example, blowing out the element of fire after 
you have invoked enough of it and your body can withstand high amounts of this 

element; you can raise the temperature of objects and even set them on fire, 


15 


using only your mind. Unlike the other method of pyrokinesis on this website, with 
the above, you can even be miles from your object. 


Invoking fire will make you hot. Depending on how many breaths you do (only 
seven and under are recommended for those who have not had experience with 
this element). Even with adepts, 20 breaths can be extreme. While you are doing 
the fire meditation for the first time, more than likely while you are doing it, you 
will feel little or nothing. DO NOT MAKE THE MISTAKE OF DOING ANY MORE 
BREATHS BECAUSE YOU MIGHT FEEL NOTHING! More than likely, you will 
feel the effects hours later. The effects of invoking fire include a fever, feeling 
BURNING HOT after a warm glow/aura manifests, insomnia and since water is 
the opposite of fire, you can get a backlash of water and this can manifest in 
depression. These effects can last several hours to several days. 


16 


Earth 


Characteristics of Earth: 

People who are dominant in earth are sensual, materialistic, practical, and they 
hate anything that is unplanned. Earth gives patience, self-discipline, makes one 
dependable, reliable, and conventional. Earth people like tradition, and security is 
extremely important to them, they are cautious, deliberate, slow in forming 
opinions, and slow in everything they do. They are reserved, have limited 
imaginations, but they have exceptional endurance. They are practical, 
grounded, and levelheaded. They are hard working; they dislike change and they 
can be stuck in a routine for years without ever getting bored. They have a hard 
time adjusting to new situations and changes. 


A LACK OF EARTH: 

People who are lacking in earth are not attuned to the material/physical world, 
they are spaced-out, impractical, they can neglect their bodies, they are flighty, 
lack self-discipline, are ungrounded, often feel out of place, and have over-active 
imaginations. These people can forget to eat, rest, exercise and so forth. They 
have trouble with routine, endurance, scheduling and organizing their lives. A 
lack of earth brings a lack of stability along with an inability to finish things. They 
are here today and gone tomorrow. These people can overspend their money 
foolishly or gamble it away. They are irresponsible and live only for today. 

Earth is the material principle. 


INVOKING EARTH: 

To invoke the earth element, go into a light to medium trance and visualize 
yourself in the middle of a large sphere of heavy dense gravity. Now, do the 
energy breathing. Breath in the earth from all sides of your body, front, back, top 
of your head and bottom of your feet. Imagine yourself getting heavier to where 
you are like lead and can no longer move- like you are buried under several feet 
of dirt. Feel the gravity of the earth pulling you. Do this for seven breaths AND 
ONLY SEVEN BREATHS! DO NOT DO ANY MORE! YOU CAN EVEN DO AS 
LITTLE AS 2-3 BREATHS, BUT NO MORE THAN SEVEN! 


You have two options for this exercise: 


1. You can breathe the earth element back out into the ether after each inhalation 
and even breath it out some more when you are finished with the seven breaths 
(This is the safest way) OR 


2. You can retain the earth. With retention of the elements, you will progress 
faster, understand how each element feels, affects you, and increase your ability 
to handle each element, but remember- this is not for everyone. It is better to 
take things slower and use caution. Always remember to use common sense. 
After some 12 - 24 hours, sit quietly and meditate a few minutes on how you feel 
after invoking the earth element. 


17 


18 


Air 


The Characteristics of Air: 

People with the element of air prominent have the ability to be objective and 
detached, and unemotional. They are intellectual; enjoy spontaneity, easily 
bored, very talkative and communicative. Air is the most social of the elements. 
Air people are usually quick in their movements and speedy. They can be very 
impractical. Air lacks feeling and emotion. Air is pure intellect. Air people can 
adapt and adjust to situations easily. They can have an over-active mind, live in 
their head, and be Jack-Of-All-Trades, and master of none. Air lacks depth. The 
sayings "up in the air" "air headed", "cool headed" are relevant to air. An 
imbalance of too much air creates a lack of planning, makes one scatterbrained, 
nervousness, high-strung, and causes nervous exhaustion. 


A LACK OF AIR makes one have a hard time detaching, as the tendency is to 
become too emotionally involved. People who lack air find themselves too 
involved with others. They can be overly emotional, have violent reactions, lash 
out, and have a very difficult time with being objective. They can have a hard 
time adjusting to new situations. The emotions often dominate in one who is 
lacking the air element. They can become obsessed. Air is the communicative, 
intellectual principle. 


INVOKING AIR: 

Sit quietly and go into a light to medium trance. Now, imagine yourself in the air. 
Feel the lightness and breathe in the air element. It is important to imagine 
yourself feeling lighter and lighter and airy. Imagine that your body is becoming 
lighter, as light as air itself to where you can no longer feel your body. Feel as if 
you are floating. 

Do this for seven breaths AND ONLY SEVEN BREATHS! DO NOT DO ANY 
MORE! YOU CAN EVEN DO AS LITTLE AS 2-3 BREATHS, BUT NO MORE 
THAN SEVEN! 


You have two options for this exercise: 


1. You can breathe the air back out into the ether after each inhalation and even 
breath it out some more when you are finished with the seven breaths (This is 
the safest way) OR 


2. You can retain the air. With retention of the elements, you will progress faster, 
understand how each element feels, affects you, and increase your ability to 
handle each element, but remember- this is not for everyone. It is better to take 
things slower and use caution. Always remember to use common sense. 


After some 12 - 24 hours, sit quietly and meditate a few minutes on how you feel 
after invoking air. 

The air element is used in rituals to incite chaos. Air can over-stimulate the 
nervous system until you get used to it so it is important to go slowly. Invoking air 
is used for levitation. 


19 


20 


Water 


Characteristics: 

People who have dominant water are too in touch with feelings and emotions. 
They are psychic, and notice things others don’t see, such as subtle nuances. 
Too much water creates irrational fears, compulsive desires, oversensitivity, 
feelings of being threatened. These people are very easily hurt and offended, 
they are impressionable, and their emotions can dominate them. Water is 
intuitive, over-reactive, fearful, timid, gives feelings of inner emptiness. and 
incites extremes of behavior. Water is compassionate, loyal, devoted, and 
sympathetic. Water is the emotional principle. 


A LACK OF WATER: 

People who are lacking in water are not in touch with their feelings. They have 
trouble in dealing with their own feelings as well as those of others. Cold, aloof, 
unfeeling, callous, they have little if any compassion towards others and have 
trouble in relationships due to a lack of an emotional rapport. These people are 
often total materialists who disregard the spiritual. 


To invoke water, go into a light to medium trance and imagine that you are 
completely under water in a large pool or lake. The water should be still. Just 
relax. Breathe in the water from all sides of your body, front, back, top of your 
head and bottom of your feet. Imagine yourself getting ice cold. Do this for seven 
breaths AND ONLY SEVEN BREATHS! DO NOT DO ANY MORE! YOU CAN 
EVEN DO AS LITTLE AS 2-3 BREATHS, BUT NO MORE THAN SEVEN! 


You have two options for this exercise: 


1. You can breathe the water back out into the ether after each inhalation and 
even breath it out some more when you are finished with the seven breaths (This 
is the safest way) OR 


2. You can retain the water. With retention of the elements, you will progress 
faster, understand how each element feels, affects you, and increase your ability 
to handle each element, but remember- this is not for everyone. It is better to 
take things slower and use caution. Always remember to use common sense. 


After some 12 - 24 hours, sit quietly and meditate a few minutes on how you feel 
after invoking water. 


The more advanced you become, the more you will feel the coldness of the water 
element. You should feel like a block of ice. Adepts are able to keep the body 
cold as ice even in the hottest of summer weather. The water element can incite 
depression, so it is important to go slowly. Water is used in rituals involving 
attraction. 


21 


22 


Akasha/Quintessence 


1. Go into a deep trance. Imagine that you are in the center of an unlimited 
space. This will feel like floating. There is no above or below or sideways. This 
unlimited space is filled with the finest energetic matter, the universal ether. Ether 
is colorless, but to our senses it appears to be of ultra-violet, near black-violet 
color, and this is the color in which we imagine the etheric matter. 


2. Breathe in the akasha/ether, visualizing yourself surrounded by the black-violet 
energy as you would with energy breathing and fill your entire being with it for 
eleven breaths. 

"In performing this exercise, you have to retain the feeling of being united to the 
entire infinite space. It is necessary to become acquainted with this unusual state 
of mind.” 

-- Franz Bardon [Initiation into Hermetics] 


3. Meditate on the feeling you get from invoking this energy for 10-15 minutes. 


The "5th element" also known as "aether," "ether," "quintessence," is extremely 
important. This element acts as a connection in working spells and magick. The 
aether is also a primer and medium, as it amplifies the other elements and given 
everything has an aura, the ether is what connects all living and inanimate 
objects. The aether will also make one ‘invisible’ in that it can act to conceal if 
programmed to do so. Everything on this earth is connected within an ocean of 
this element. 


23 


24 


Condensing the Elements 


1. Go into a light trance. 


2. Breathe in the element of fire and upon the exhale, direct all of it to your base 
chakra, so it is concentrated. 


3. Do this for five breaths. 
4. Meditate upon and feel the heat in your base chakra. 


If you feel uncomfortable doing this, you can substitute directing the water 
element into your sacral chakra. Do either one or the other. 


What this does is to train you to concentrate and direct an element. This can also 
be done outside of your body and for advanced magick, you will need this skill. It 
must be taken slowly though. This is very advanced. The fire element will 
stimulate your kundalini. Directing the elements to specific parts of the body can 
also be used to heal. NEVER DIRECT THE FIRE ELEMENT TO YOUR HEART 
OR YOUR BRAIN!! This can be very dangerous and can cause permanent 
damage to these two very sensitive organs. For adepts, organs other than the 
brain or heart are usually able to handle condensed elements. The organs are 
not the chakras, as some have confused these in the e-groups. Breathing in 
elements into your chakras is fine. 


25 


26 


Evoking the Elements 


When your goals are personal and pertain to yourself, this is the time to invoke 
energy and project it from yourself. 


Evoking energy is different. When spells are for others, it is important to evoke 
energy as energy that you project from yourself will establish a connection with 
the person you send it to. Both in cursing and healing, for obvious reasons, this is 
undesirable. The energy you use must be taken from the universe. It is very 
important to master both evocation and invocation of the elements in order to 
progress to advanced levels of ability. 


Evoking Fire 

Get into a trance and visualize you are in the middle of fire. Feel the heat and 
hear the hissing and crackling of the flames and feel the burning. Now, begin to 
collect and condense that fire into a sphere in front of you. Draw the fire element 
from all directions into the sphere in front of you. The more of the fire element 
you direct into the sphere, the more dense, material, and hotter it will become. 
You should feel the heat while you are doing this. The more you compress and 
condense the fire, the more the heat will grow. You should actually have the 
sensation of literally being in an oven. 


Now dissolve the sphere of fire by visualizing it dissipating — the exact opposite 
of when you brought it together. Keep working at visualizing it dissipating, losing 
its strength, power, and heat, and eventually dissolving into nothing. 


Evoking Air 

Get into a trance and visualize you are in the middle of air, fill the entire room 
with it. Draw the air from all directions simultaneously into a sphere in front of 
you. Fill and pack the sphere with the air element. You should feel very light, as 
though you are floating. 


When you are finished packing the air into the sphere, dissolve it as you did with 
the fire sphere. 


Evoking Water 

Get into a trance and visualize you are in the middle of an ocean or lake. Draw 
the water element from all directions. Feel the water at first as a cold vapor, the 
closer you draw it to your body, as you condense the water more and more, you 
should feel icy cold. Now, pack the water element into a sphere in front of you 
and then dissolve it, the same as you did with the fire and air. Let it evaporate 
away into nothingness. 


Evoking Earth 

Get into a trance and draw a gray mass, similar to clay, from all directions 
simultaneously. The closer you bring it to yourself, it becomes browner and 
browner, rich like soil and more dense. Fill the room entirely with the heavy mass 
of the earth element and visualize it compacting into a sphere. Feel the 


27 


heaviness and the gravity and its pressure on your body. When finished, dissolve 
it as you did with the other elements. 


Evoke the element of fire again, but this time, have a glass of tepid water in front 
of you and draw the fire from all directions and condense it into the glass of 
water. It is best to use a clear glass with this exercise. Imagine the water getting 
hotter and hotter with the fire element. 


If you are successful, the water will increase in temperature by a few degrees. 
When finished, you can taste the water and it should have an unusual taste to it if 
you were successful. 


Later on, when you find you can raise the temperature of tepid water, then work 
with colder and colder water and practice the same. 


Reference: Initiation into Hermetics by Franz Bardon © 1956 


28 


The Chariot of RA and the Rotation of the Chi 


The true meaning of the Chariot of Ra, which evolved into the Reidh Rune, is 
the rotation of the chi/bioelectricity. This also corresponds to the Chariot 
trump of the Tarot. This meditation is advanced. Demons gave this to me and 
it is of the Egyptian Kabalah. 


1. Condense your chi into any one of your chakras. This works great 
when you can feel your chi, as at sometimes it is more amplified than at 
others. If you can't feel your chi, just do several rounds of energy 
breathing. 


2. Circulate your condensed chi (which should be a small ball of intense light) to 
each of your chakras. For example, at the base of the spine, up the spine to the 
second and all the way up to the crown; drop the ball into your 6th chakra behind 
your third eye, down into the pineal gland if you wish, and then focus it forward to 
your third eye then drop it to your throat chakra in the front at your throat and 
then down to the front of your chest to your heart chakra, on down to your 
perennial chakra between your anus and genitals and then back to your base 
chakra. That completes one circuit. 


3. The difference with this meditation is at each chakra where your chi is focused, 
vibrate RA. The vibrations should be felt in the chakra you are focusing on. This 
is correctly done by beginning the vibration with the English R, then switching to 
the rolled R. 

EEERRRRRRRR-RRRRRRRRRR-AAAAAAHHHHHHHHHHH The R's in the 
middle should be rolled. 


Getting to where you can feel the vibrations in each chakra takes practice but will 
come in time. 


29 


30 


Rotating the Elements 


Rotating the elements is very advanced. One should already be adept with 
circulating energy through the chakras. This exercise begins the Magnum Opus. 
The Magnum Opus is the "Great Work." This is the finishing of Satan's work on 
humanity- reaching physical and spiritual perfection, equality with the Gods and 
immortality. 

One of the most important steps in advanced meditation is to circulate the 
elements through each of the chakras. This is very advanced and is done after 
condensing the element into a chakra it rules, and then circulating it. Work on 
mastering each one. You should definitely FEEL the element- i.e., searing hot for 
fire, ice cold for water, heavy for earth, and light for air. Quintessence is warm to 
hot. This is very advanced and should only be attempted by experienced 
meditators. 

This will provide an important foundation for more advanced works. The ancients 
used the seasons to facilitate their workings. This is a part of the four points. 
Summer is hot and meditating on and invoking the element of fire is easier for 
beginners. Just make sure you have a place to cool down. Spring is a good time 
to work with air, fall is great for earth, and winter is good for working with water, 
as it is cold. 

The next step should be combining the elements, such as circulating water after 
circulating fire and then circulating quintessence. This is all very powerful. 


The waxing and full moon acts to transform the fiery rays of the sun into the 
element of water. Energy from both the Sun and Moon should also be invoked 
and circulated. 


For example- for rotating the element of fire: 
1. Breathe in the element of fire into your entire body. 
2. Condense the fire into a small ball inside your base chakra. 


3. Now, direct that ball into your sacral chakra, then your solar chakra, your 
throat chakra, your third eye, your crown chakra and then down from your crown 
chakra into your 6th chakra behind your third eye and to the back of your head- 
through the rear sixth chakra and on down your spine at each chakra. 

Take your time with this, burning each of your chakras thoroughly. This is very 
empowering and cleansing. 


4. When finished, either direct the fireball to your base chakra or expel it through 
your solar plexus chakra. 


Do the same with the other elements, including the quintessence. Doing this with 
the chi or pineal secretions is also very powerful AND pleasurable. In the 
beginning, you should only work with and master one element per meditation 
session. Fire can also be invoked from the sun- the hotter the sun, the better. 


31 


32 


Breath of Fire 


Fire is the key element to empowering the soul. It is next to the life force and the 
spark of life symbolized by the Satanic Lightening Bolt. Those of you who are 
transforming your souls should keep your astral temperature warm. By this, | do 
not mean scorching hot, but warm. This is like an incubator and acts to create 
necessary changes in the life force, the soul, and the aura. 


In addition to invoking fire, what is known as the yogic “Bellow’s Breath” this 
method of breathing can be used when invoking fire to amplify the effects. 
Spiritual alchemists were known as “puffers” and in many old paintings, we see 
the bellows near the fire, along with many funnel shaped flasks and such 
symbolizing the chakras. This is also symbolized by the beak of the Ibis of Thoth. 
Instead of just breathing in energy, as with the foundation meditation, use the 
bellow’s breath to invoke the fire element. THIS IS NOT FOR NEWBIES AND IS 
EXTREMELY ADVANCED. 


BELLOW’S BREATH: THE BREATH OF FIRE. 


Contract your abdominal muscles, forcefully, creating an exhale, by sucking your 
stomach in real hard and fast. Immediately relax and air will enter the top part of 
your lungs by itself. Practice a few times, get a feel for it and do 20 in a row, in 
and out, using your abdominal muscles in rapid succession After 20, exhale, 
inhale and fill your lungs, contract your anus, lower your chin to your chest, 
exhale and repeat 3 - 5 times. 


33 


34 


More Information about the Elements 


Opposed to the plethora of warnings in the older meditation texts, one should 
gradually build their tolerance to the elements. We have found these warnings to 
have no more credibility than the "three-fold" crap. Some of us, myself included, 
have breathed in fire for well over 100 breaths, BUT, we worked up to this level 
patiently over a period of time. In order to perform fire magick with formidable 
intensity, one must be able to hold the fire element in large amounts and have a 
tolerance for it. The same goes for the other elements. One who can hold their 
fire element is capable of totally incinerating a victim of a black magick spell, who 
has no tolerance to this element. This comes in time. 


The Akasha/Ether/Quintessence we have found is a primer. Quintessence 
intensifies any working. This element is closely related to fire and when working 
with it on a daily basis, one will find the body temperature rises. The rise in body 
temperature seems to be lasting. When willing something to be, it can be 
imprinted in the quintessence, making it much more powerful. In absorbing the 
quintessence, which is ultra-violet light, one way is to visualize a "black light" 
which was popular in the 1970's to make posters glow. The color of the black 
light is the color of the quintessence. 


More information regarding the elements and their specific uses is forthcoming. 
Check the main meditation page for updates. 


35 


36 


Part II 
Advanced Meditations 


38 


Expanding the Sushumna 


The sushumna is the line the kundalini travels up the spine. It is very small in 
diameter. Tibetan monks would be tested for initiation by stripping down naked, 
wrapping themselves in a wet sheet, and spending the night in the freezing 
mountains, sitting in the snow. In the morning, if the initiate passed the test, the 
sheet would be bone dry and several feet of snow around the monk would be 
melted. 


Expanding the sushumna is used to raise body temperature and create heat. 
This power can also be applied to pyrokinesis (setting objects on fire with the 
power of the mind). 

While in a trance, visualize the sushumna expanding to the spine in either a red- 
hot or a white-hot glowing light. Focus on this for several minutes and from there, 
expand it beyond the spine, again, focus for several minutes, and then expand it 
two inches beyond the spine. Keep expanding until you are several feet or more 
beyond your physical body. 


This meditation produces a lot of heat, especially when done regularly. When 
practiced on a frequent basis, one can expect a rise in body temperature. 


39 


40 


Telekinesis 


Telekinesis is the ability of the mind to move objects, through concentration. This 
is very advanced and you will need a very powerful aura. We all have this ability, 
but due to centuries of Christian generational suppression of the powers of the 
mind, this part of our brain is now dormant. Like learning a gymnastics 
maneuver, with getting the *feel* for it and using it, it will become easier and 
easier with time, dedication and patience. 


Everything on this Earth contains an energy field or aura, even inanimate objects. 
With performing telekinesis, you must connect your aura with aura of the object 
you intend to move. The strength of your aura will determine your success. 


The following exercises help in developing telekinesis. You should be 
experienced with energy manipulation and have powerful hand chakras. In order 
to work up to this, the foundation meditation, and the hand chakra meditation 
should be mastered. 


This exercise is best done after power meditation when your aura is strong. 


1. To begin, suspend a pendulum in front of you. This can be any object from a 
small pencil or a light ball, like a ping-pong ball. Anything small, light, and even 
will work. It must be in front of you, preferably over a table, where you can relax 
and sit. Hang the pendulum, so nothing is touching it or coming into physical 
contact with it and so it can move easily and freely. 


2. Place your hands about an inch on each side of the pendulum, palms facing 
the pendulum and direct energy through your palm chakras into the pendulum. 


3. Now, try pushing and pulling using your will through the energy. You will see 
your aura pushing and pulling the object. One hand pushes energy and the other 
hand pulls energy. Visualize your aura connecting with the aura of the pendulum. 
Do not move your hands. 


When you are able to move the pendulum, place your hands farther and farther 
apart. 


The next step is to move the pendulum using the energy from your fingertips. At 
first, try to pull it with the energy from your fingertips. 


The key is to keep distancing yourself from the object. The next step, which is 
extremely advanced, is to begin using the powers of your third eye and move 
objects by connecting your aura with that of the object and willing them to move. 


Do not get frustrated. This takes intense concentration, a strong mind and aura, 
but with enough patience and practice, the time you succeed in moving the 

object will become shorter and shorter. When you learn to use this area of your 
brain and strengthen it (it will become easier and easier), the first few times are 


4 


the most difficult. It may take several sessions, sometimes even weeks, but it is 
not impossible. 


Here are some practical tips: 
Here are some tips: 


It definitely helps to be able to see auras. When we open our third eye, this gives 
us the ability, but we must learn to use this ability to see. This is analogous to 
athletics. If one has the strength and flexibility, the potential is there, all one 
needs to do is the movement to get the feel and to train the movement into 
muscle memory. It is the same with the mind. 

Start out with light objects. Gemstones such as quartz crystals are great, 
provided they are small and light. These have a strong aura of their own. 
Telekinesis is best attempted after power meditation when one's energy is most 
radiant. 

Telekinesis like any other skill should be worked on daily until mastered. Heavier 
and heavier objects can replace the lighter ones as proficiency is achieved. | 
have had success with the above method. 


42 


Pyrokinesis 


Pyrokinesis is the ability to control, ignite, and extinguish fire, using the powers of 
one's mind. One should be adept at invoking and fire element and being able to 
hold significant amounts of this element. 


This is dangerous. One should be adept and very experienced in handling and 
directing energy, as inexperience can cause dangerous burns to yourself, even 
though you may have a powerful aura. An exceptionally powerful aura is 
necessary for pyrokinetic ability. 


1. Begin by lighting a candle. 


2. In order to do this safely, you should be adept at putting fires out before 
igniting them. Position both of your hands, palms facing inward about half an inch 
from each side of the candle flame and direct your energy into the flame, willing it 
to die out. This is extremely advanced and you must have a powerful aura. Try 
concentrating on black energy between your palms where the flame should be. 


3. To ignite a flame: invoke the element of fire and direct the energy you produce 
to your palm chakras by exhaling it through your palms. 


4. Blow out the candle. Position both of your hands, palms facing inward about 
half an inch from each side of the candlewick, which should be an ember. 


5. Direct energy from your palm chakras and concentrate intense heat on the 
ember, willing it to ignite. Try concentrating on white-hot energy, between your 
palms. The ember, with practice will begin to glow brighter and eventually, will 
ignite. 


6. Put out the flame, concentrate the energy between your palms on the ember of 
the wick, and direct it to ignite the flame again. With enough palm chakra energy 
and concentration, it will relight. 


As you advance, move your palms farther and farther apart. 


When you are proficient with your palms 2 - 3 feet apart, concentrate on lighting 
the wick of the candle without the ember. Ignite the cold wick. 

In addition to using the energy from your palm chakras, you are using the powers 
from your third eye. The third eye has a direct line of energy to the physical eyes 
where the energy projects. Once you are adept at the above exercise, try using 
less and less of your hands. Again, it is important to put fires out before learning 
to ignite them. 


Expand your aura to connect with the candle flame. The candle should be a foot 
or less in front of you. Connect your aura and put out the flame. 


Once you are adept, do the same and ignite the ember. 
43 


When you are able to use only your aura to light the candle flame, expand your 
aura to connect with an object a foot or less in front of you and project the heat 
as you did with your palms. As you progress, keep moving the object farther and 
farther away. 


Instead of just doing void meditation, the above exercises can be substituted as 
they require intense, unwavering concentration. 


44 


Advanced Chakra Spinning 


When spinning your chakras, say to yourself for each one "speed of light." Then 
spin them faster and faster until they turn white with energy and power like the 
sun. Do this with each one. This really helps replace lost energy. 


This speed will set your vibration at a higher level. When our chakras vibrate at a 
faster rate, they protect us from misfortune and disease. It also opens us to the 
astral and protects us astrally as well as in the physical world. Remember, 
though, energy work must be done every day as each day builds on the day 
before and until a strong energy field is permanently established, short term 
benefits can be lost or harder to restore. 


45 


46 


Spinning Energy Fields Meditation 


1. Clean your aura and chakras 
2. Sense your aura. Breathe in white-gold* energy into your aura. 


3. Condense the energy and spin it. (Spin it whichever way you feel 
comfortable) 


4. Now, program it to attract, protect you or repel- whatever your intent is: 
For example- for protection: “This powerful energy is combined with my 
aura, is always intact, and is always protecting me in every way” 

5. Feel it spinning. This is a pulsating feeling. Now, affirm: “This 
protective energy shield is permanent and feeds off of and replenishes 
itself from the universal light energy. 

6. Take more time to sense the shield and really feel it. 

7. Now, sense your astral body. This is your ghost- the astral image that 
is transparent and looks like your physical body and repeat the above 
steps 2-6. 

8. Join both shields together and meditate on both. 

9. Sense your light body and repeat steps 2-6 and 8. Join all three shields 
together and spin them. 

You may have to repeat this several times or if you feel the field weakening. It 


should be strong and vibrant. 


*The white-gold is standard. Feel free to work with different colors specific to your 
goals. 


47 


48 


Satanic Healing 


Several years ago, Father Satan spoke with me concerning healing. | hada 
problem and he told me at that time "You are not strong enough." | had a heavy 
radio setting beside me and he stated an example "Try moving that radio using a 
sheet of paper." Obviously the paper would have crumpled. 


To effectively heal, your soul must have power. This is accomplished through 
consistent power meditation. 


Once your soul is powerful enough, healing comes much easier. 


Before | go on, | want to state that anyone who is under a doctor's care or taking 
medication SHOULD NOT stop taking ANY medication prescribed or forego 
medical treatment, antibiotics, etc., until given a medical clearance by a licensed 
physician. We are not xians! Antibiotics and such SAVE LIVES! 

1, myself am very grateful for modern medical technology. The ability to heal 
using your own powers is very advanced and takes experience. If you do not like 
the advice of one doctor, then get a second opinion from another doctor, but do 
not just go about psychic healing and deny yourself or others in your care, such 
as children or animals, proper and prompt professional medical treatment. Never 
stop taking any medication, or alter prescribed doses unless given the ok by your 
doctor. 


To heal yourself, you should already have experience in working magick. 


1. Make sure your chakras are properly aligned. This ensures that needed 
energy is getting to them. Disease usually manifests in the soul/astral body 
before symptoms occur in the physical body. This is almost always due to poor 
energy/chi circulation to the organ/s or a cut-off of a pathway due to an accident, 
or injury. 


2. You should begin by cleaning the diseased part as you would clean your aura. 
Cleaning the diseased part should be done several times every day immediately 
before applying the healing energy. 


3. The foundation of healing for most problems is to raise and direct energy and 
keep sending it to the afflicted organ, while programming it. When you FEEL your 
energy strongly, just direct it to the diseased/afflicted part of your body. 
Throughout the day, you can also keep directing your energy and visualize the 
white-gold light, lighting up the organ and state your affirmation. This can be 
done lightly, in addition to the more formal working in step 2. 


4. Step two needs to be repeated several times every day, until healing is 
complete. 


5. Healing can also be done using Runes. Vibration is exceptionally powerful in 
both raising and empowering energy. 


49 


6. You have to KNOW it is working and not have any doubts. In other words, 
have faith in your ability. 


7. Always remember to keep your affirmations in the present tense. 
"The_ (disease) is leaving my body (or diseased organ), completely and 
permanently. My. is strong, healthy and normal in every way." 


8. Be open. Many times the working will lead us to certain foods or what we need 
in order to heal health problems. This can come in different ways. 


To heal a loved one, direct white-gold brilliant light like the Sun into him/her and 
program it. 


The foundation and objective of Spiritual Satanism is knowledge and applying 
that knowledge by using our own powers. | had a situation some time ago, with a 
pet who had a life threatening disorder that occurred all of a sudden. At the time, 
| had no money for a vet. Father Satan came to me. He stood behind me and 
placed both of his hands on my shoulders and told me to "breathe" energy into 
her. | visualized the energy as the white-gold light and lit her up with it, as brilliant 
as the Sun and stated an affirmation " is healthy, safe, and protected in 
every way." 


| did this twenty times. Father Satan told me, NO, do it 200 times. He also told 
me she would need to have surgery and he would get me the money. | started to 
cry. He told me not to cry, as this was a lack of faith. 

The energy | put into her stabilized her. | had to do it again and shortly thereafter, 
| had the money for the surgery, which was very expensive. She got the surgery 
and she is now fine. 


50 


How to Detach Unwanted People/Entities from Your Aura 


People in our lives, especially those of whom we have emotions for - either 
positive or negative, are attached to our aura. Normally, we are attached at the 
chakras. These attachments can last for many lifetimes. They are most common 
in family members and those who are close to us. 


There is another kind of attachment and that is what is called "psychic 
vampirism." Psychic vampirism is when another person attaches him/herself 
astrally to your soul and the relationship is of detriment. He/she usually attaches 
at one or more of your chakras and drains your energy. In all close relationships, 
there is a mutual soul attachment for better or worse. In the case of a psychic 
vampire, the relationship is analogous to that of a parasite and a host. A psychic 
vampire does not even have to be involved in a relationship, as it is natural for 
his/her aura to feed off of the auras of others. 


There are symptoms of psychic attachment, the most pronounced are thoughts 
and/or feelings that are not your own. Your energy eventually becomes depleted, 
especially when you are around the psychic vampire. Whether they are 
physically near to you or at a distance, once a psychic vampire has attached 
him/herself to your aura, they can drain you. Psychic vampires are rarely 
strangers. in many cases, this can even be a family member. A good example is 
with love/sexual relationships. Following a break up, one party may not want to 
let go. Another case is that with obsession. Obsession is a bit different as the 
obsessed person is actually *giving* energy to the object of his/her obsession. 
This is where a psychic vampire enters into an ideal situation. There is a constant 
and willing supply of energy from the obsessed individual that the vampire 
benefits from. 


In almost all cases of psychic vampirism, there is a weakness on the part of the 
host person. This weakness is usually of an emotional nature. The parasite/host 
relationship often satisfying an unfulfilled need for one or both of the individuals 
involved. The attaching person's energy feeds off this. In ridding ourselves of this 
influence, we must acknowledge that a problem exists and WANT to let go. If the 
host subconsciously does not want to let go, this exercise will be useless. 


To remove an unwanted person from your aura: 


1. During the cycle of a waning moon, (a few days after the full moon; and a few 
days before the new moon) find a quiet place where you will not be disturbed. 


2. Relax and enter into a deep trance, for this working, the deeper the trance, the 
better. Now ask your mind to reveal anyone who has an inappropriate tie. (You 
can also ask your mind this before you fall asleep at another time, and this will be 
revealed in a dream). (If you know who it is beforehand, you can visualize them). 
If there are several, then work with one person at a time. This working can be 
time consuming. It is best to work with one person per session. You should allow 
yourself a few days in-between sessions ideally so your aura can adjust and your 


51 


energies can rebound. Depending upon the strength of the bond, the working 
may have to be repeated. 


3. Ask your mind where the connection(s) is. You may find that a mutual 
connection exists, where there are two or more attachments at the chakras. Take 
as much time as you need, using an astral knife, cutter, laser, or whatever you 
are comfortable working with, and dislodge the connections completely on both 
sides. 


4. Place the connections in a pile as you work. Your will must be strong here, as 
the other person may not want to let go. Seal the areas on your aura where these 
connections were attached with healing light/energy, white/gold is the most 
powerful, but use whatever color you are comfortable with, as we are all 
individuals. You don’t want any injuries or holes left in your aura. 


5. If you care for the other person, you can heal and seal his/her holes made by 
the detachments. 


6. Invoke the element of fire and build an astral fire with this, by directing it, and 
burn all of the detachment strands. 


When you are finished, clean your aura. 


When you are ready, open your eyes, get up slowly and move around, do 
something physical- eat, exercise, or whatever to ground yourself. 


52 


Freeing the Soul 


With knowledge and power, one can supersede so-called "karma." We are all 
well aware of reincarnation, many of the people in your life, for good or ill, you 
have known before, especially family members. These relationships can last 
many lifetimes. Some of them have a negative effect on us and are destructive to 
our growth and wellbeing. The same negative relationship is repeated over and 
over, back and forth, in different ways, times and bodies. 


The good news is, with the proper knowledge and taking appropriate action using 
this knowledge, we can remove these negative people from our lives; thus setting 
ourselves and the offending ones free from the control of the evil will of malignant 
powers. 


To begin, enter into a trance and go back through your lifetime, as early as you 
can remember. Write down the persons involved in every negative/destructive 
relationship you have ever experienced in your life. Leave the positive/beneficial 
relationships out of this, as these are people we want to continue with. 


Negative people can include parents and in many cases, siblings, relatives, 
schoolteachers, former friends, enemies, spouses, lovers, and/or people who 
have used you or harmed you in any lasting way, either physically or 
psychologically. Family relationships are the most powerful, this includes 
spouses and significant others. 


Take your time with this exercise. You can always go back and add more names 
to the list as old memories surface. Negative karmic relationships are something 
we need to cut from our lives. Remember when you judge each relationship, that 
no relationship is perfect. 


The most negative relationships will be obvious and you can soon go to work on 
them. If there is any serious repressed anger that cannot be dealt with, outside of 
retribution, then perform the appropriate revenge ritual(s). Get it over with in the 
here and now and be sure to vent everything. This will act as a cathartic and is 
very therapeutic. You will then be able to heal emotionally and psychologically. 


It is best to perform the working during a waning Moon. The Moon should *NOT* 
be in the signs of Cancer, or Libra, nor should it be void of course. 


Others attach themselves to your soul via strands resembling those with astral 
projection. They are NOT all "silver," as most popular books lead people to 
believe. | have seen gold and bronze colored strands and there may be even 
more colors, so assume nothing. Perform the Detaching exercise to remove 
these ties. 


Make good and sure, the other person (as well as yourself) is completely sealed 
off when you remove the attachment. Don't try to do more than one person per 
session. Start with the worst individuals, living or deceased. If you don't know 


53 


whether they are dead or alive, it doesn't matter. When you are finished, clean 
your aura. 


Different people are best dealt with each with different sessions. At the end, you 


should feel lighter, freer and at peace. Thank Father Satan at the end of each 
session. He is the one who brings us the knowledge we need to be free. 


54 


Meditation on the Spirit 


The properties of the spirit in correspondence to the elements are as follows: the 
will is of the fire element, the intellect and memory are of air, all aspects of feeling 
are of the water element, and all aspects of consciousness that connect the three 
elements is of the earth element. 


1. Go into a trance and focus inward into your own spirit, try to be aware of and 
feel your spirit/astral body and meditate on it. 


2. Meditate on each aspect of the above mentioned elements in correspondence 
to the parts of your spirit. 


What this exercise does: 

This exercise is important as it hones each aspect of your soul to work magick. It 
will enable you to influence these aspects within yourself and also when you 
master them, within others. You will eventually, with practice learn to strengthen 
or eliminate them. 


Kundalini Meditation 


The following is very effective in stimulating the kundalini serpent. For obvious 
reasons, people who are new and/or those who do not have several years of 
meditation behind them should NOT attempt this. It is my job to reveal spiritual 
knowledge- no withholding of any information. Please take the warning seriously 
as prematurely raising the serpent can be dangerous and extremely unpleasant. 


| posted earlier regarding the philosopher's stone and condensing the chi/witch 
power/bioelectricity. This works best when you can feel yourself glowing with it. 
People who are experienced should have no problem in feeling their witch power 
whenever they choose to do so. 


Take the energy, condense it, and move it to the base chakra. 


Now, move to and focus the energy BENEATH the base chakra DIRECTLY on 
the coiled serpent. FEEL it and meditate on it there, holding it there. 


Be prepared for aftereffects. It is VERY IMPORTANT to keep directing your 
kundalini upwards and out your crown chakra. You do not want it pooling in your 
legs, which this meditation can have a tendency to do. Again, this is very 
advanced and should only be attempted by experienced meditators. Kundalini 
that goes down, instead of upwards, is extremely dangerous and can cause 
paralysis. 


55 


56 


Splitting the Soul 
These meditations are extremely advanced and can be dangerous to newbies. 
One should be experienced in meditation, energy manipulation, invoking the 
elements and in understanding of what he/she is doing on the astral level. 
To begin with any of these meditations, one must be thoroughly relaxed. Being 
disturbed by others, loud noises, the phone ringing, visitors or anything else, 
including being touched by animals can be dangerous. 
Meditating upon the Aura: 
1. To sense and feel your aura: expand your awareness out past your physical 
self a few inches and sense your aura's energy. 
2. FEEL your aura and meditate upon it for a few minutes. 
3. Expand and contract your aura. 
4. Breathe energy into and out of your aura. 
5. If you feel you are ready, you can invoke each of the elements into your aura. 
These should be done slowly, no more than seven breaths to begin with. It is 
best to only go with one element per day. 
6. Meditate on the feeling of each element after invoking into your aura. 
7. If you feel uncomfortable, just breathe the element back out. 
Meditating upon your Astral Body (This is your Ka; your ethereal double- 
your ghost: 


1. Focus inward upon your awareness. This is your astral body. 


2. Wherever you focus your attention, this is your astral body. 
When we expand our awareness, we expand this aspect of our soul. 


3. Meditate on being aware of your astral body. 


Meditating upon the Light Body: 


1. The light body can be felt by expanding your awareness to the energy within 
your body. This can be felt. 


2. FEEL your light body and meditate upon this. 


3. Breathe in energy into and out of your light body. 


57 


58 


Part Ill 
Advanced Empowering of the Chakras 


60 


Opening the Watchtowers 


The three "knot" chakras referred to in Sanskrit are the 
base, the heart (the major knot chakra) and the sixth, 
behind the third eye - The heart with the side extensions 
in the shoulder chakras, the base with extensions in the 
hip chakras and the sixth with extensions in the temple 
chakras. These three differ from the others in that they 
hold more power and are in the shape of equal armed 
crosses, with the heart being the most powerful of the 
three. This can be seen blatantly in Barbatos' Sigil at left. 


This is also where the fictitious tale of the crucifixion of that foul nazarene was 
stolen from- this CONCEPT. The nazarene being in the middle of the two. The 
more we learn of the occult, it is beyond any doubt that xianity is nothing more 
than a hoax and completely false in every respect. 

| have learned from Satan that the Enochian Watchtowers, the three knots and 
the esoteric teachings in the Necronomicon are all allegories. The enemy 
deludes humanity by leading us to believe all of this is material, characters, 
places, and such, when in the truth it is all spiritual. The true spiritual path leads 
us to the godhead where we attain our goals, desires and become masters of our 
own destinies. 


Set's Sigil also depicts the three. Note how the crosses 
flare out at the ends, depicting the chakras. To fully 
empower these three chakras one must vibrate all four of 
them plus the fifth in the middle, taking turns at each one 
and this is where the swastika came from originally as the 
swastika is the shape of energy. 


Opening these centers will further open your mind and powers. Once all three 
centers are fully opened, one will reach a new spiritual level of knowledge and 
understanding. 


Do your best to feel each of the vibrations in the chakra you are working on. Just 
focus intensely. This is difficult, but just do the best you can. 


Each of these meditations is very powerful and only one chakra should be done 


at a time with a 48-hour waiting period before proceeding to the next. A sensation 
of pressure or aching indicates you were successful in opening these points. 


61 


62 


Opening the Watchtowers of the Third Knot 
Third Eye 


Temple Chakras-[> oy <Pemple Chakras 


Sith Chakra 
(Beneath 7th) 


Rear 6th Chakra 
Top of the Head View of the Chakras 


The diagram above illustrates from a view looking down at upon the top of the 
head. Note the four quarters. Within these are the four watchtowers of the sixth 
chakra. The sixth chakra behind the third eye in the middle is the center, which is 
of the quintessence. 


1. 


Begin with the third eye in the front. Breathe in energy into your third 
eye until your lungs are comfortably full and on the exhale, vibrate 
"THOTH" 

"TH - TH- TH— TH- OH- OH- OH- OH- TH-TH-TH-TH -TH 
This is done by vibrating the TH and OH at the same time as when you 
first opened your third eye. When you breathe in energy, visualize 
each chakra the correct way it should be aligned (points facing 
inwards) and light it up with the energy. 


. Repeat the steps given in number 1 now with your left temple chakra 


. Repeat the steps given in number one with your rear chakra at the 


back of your head, directly behind the sixth chakra 


. Do the same with your right temple chakra 


. Now do the same with your sixth chakra in the center of your head 


directly behind the third eye. 


. Repeat steps 1 — 6, seven times. 


63 


64 


1. 


Opening the Watchtowers of the Second Knot 


Begin with the heart chakra extension in the front of your chest. 
Breathe in energy into this chakra until your lungs are comfortably full 
and on the exhale, vibrate "AMON" 

"AH - AH - AH—AH-M-M-M-M- UH-UH-N-N -N-N" 
When you breathe in energy, visualize each chakra 

the correct way it should be aligned (points facing 

inwards) and light it up with the energy. The center 

heart chakra has points facing both upwards and 

downwards in the shape of a hexagram, illustrated 

at right. 


. Repeat the steps given in number 1 now with your left shoulder chakra 


. Repeat the steps given in number one with your rear heart chakra at 


the back on your spine, directly behind the middle heart chakra 


. Do the same with your right shoulder chakra 


. Now do the same with your heart chakra in the center of your chest. 


Repeat steps 1 — 5, seven times. 


65 


66 


Opening the Watchtowers of the First Knot 


. Begin with the base chakra extension in the front. This is the right at the 
root of the clitoris for women and the penis for men. Breathe in energy into 
this chakra until your lungs are comfortably full and on the exhale, drop 
your chin to your chest and vibrate "ADAR" 

"AH - AH - AH - AH - TH- TH- TH- TH- AH- AH- R-R-R-R" 

In Kabalistic "speech," the letter D is vibrated as a TH, but the tongue is a 
bit further upwards where your two teeth meet with your gums. This 
completes a powerful circuit of energy. The R's are always rolled. 


. When you breathe in energy, visualize each chakra the correct way it 
should be aligned (points facing inwards), and light it up with the energy. 
The center heart chakra faces point downwards. 


. Repeat the steps given in number 1 now with your left hip chakra 


. Repeat the steps given in number one with your rear base chakra at the 
back on your spine, directly at your tailbone. 


. Do the same with your right hip chakra 
. Now do the same with your center base chakra this is located at your 
perineum. (The perineum is half-way between your anus and your 


genitals). 


Repeat steps 1 — 5, seven times. 


67 


68 


Opening the Remaining Chakras 


The Throat Chakra 


1. Begin with your throat chakra. Breathe in energy into your front throat 
chakra extension and vibrate "NINNGHIZHIDDA." 
N-N-N-N-N-E-E-E-E-N-N-N-N-N-GH-GH-GH-GH-E-E-E-E-ZH-ZH-ZH-ZH- 
E-E-E-TH-TH-TH-THE-THE-AH-AH-AH 
Remember Kabalistic "speech" is different from our everyday words. 

The I's are pronounced as EE, as in the word "see." The "GH" is guttural 
and made in the back of the throat, not as a hard guttural K, but as a 
smooth sound. "ZH" is pronounced as the French "J" as in "Jacques." 
Again, D is pronounced as "THE" as given above. 

Align your chakra as shown in the illustration below. 


————_ 


2. Now, focus on your middle throat chakra and do the f ~ 
same as in step one. f \ 
: F 2) 

3. Then, do the same with the rear extension on your bva 


spine at the back of your neck. 


4. Repeat steps 1 — 3 seven times. 


69 


70 


The Solar Plexus Chakra 


1. Breathe in energy into the front solar plexus chakra and 
on the exhale drop your chin to your chest and vibrate: \ \ 
RA 7 
R-R-R-AH-AH-AH-AH-AH-AH ‘ ( 
Be sure to roll your R's. Align your chakra as shown in 
the illustration to the right. 


2. Repeat step 1 with your middle chakra and then your \> Vv <q 
rear chakra j 


3. Do the above seven times. ( 


The Sacral Chakra 


1. Breathe in energy into the front solar plexus chakra and on the 
exhale drop your chin to your chest and vibrate: "NERGAL" 
N-N-N-AY-AY-R-R-R-G-G-G-AY-AY-L-L-L 
Be sure to roll your R's and align your chakra as shown in the 
illustration to the left. 


2. Repeat step 1 with your middle chakra and then your rear 
CAC chakra 


3. Do the above seven times. 


71 


72 


The 
Necronomicon Meditations 


The Necronomicon meditations must be performed according to the planets, for 
maximum effectiveness. Dates and times for each planet ruling the specific 
meditation are given in Greenwich Time [Universal Time]. 


73 


74 


Necronomicon Meditation for Opening the Third Eye 


The following meditation must be performed during a powerful waxing full Moon. 
The moon should not be debilitated or in its sign of detriment (Capricorn) or fall 
(Scorpio). This meditation is most powerful when performed with a powerful full 
Moon, (dates below) otherwise, you will be wasting your time. The ancients knew 
patience in regards to power. 

This meditation must be done at night and preferably directly under the light of 
the full Moon. 


1. Sit quietly and focus on your third eye. 


2. Breathe in and on the exhale, chant Nanna: 
N-N-N-N-N-N-N-N-AH-AH-AH-N-N-N-N-N-N-N-N-AH-AH-AH 


3. It is very important to FEEL the chant in your third eye so adjust the tone 
accordingly. 


4. Do not try to force your breathing. Feel free to take extra breaths in-between 
the chanting. 


5. Do this 30 times. 


6. Visualize your third eye with silver light projecting. The color of the Third Eye is 
silver 


STEPS ONE THROUGH SIX SHOULD ALL BE DONE AT THE SAME TIME 
AND AS ONE STEP. 


The dates are given below, but can vary because of local times. It is important to 
check your local times for the full moon. 


2012 

January: 

Waxing full Moon at home in Cancer [very powerful] from January 9th through 
January 10th at 04:36 


October: 


Waxing full Moon exalted in Taurus from October 29th through October 31st at 
18:41 


75 


76 


Necronomicon Throat Chakra Mediation 


DO NOT ATTEMPT THIS MEDITATION UNLESS YOU HAVE ALREADY 
PERFORMED IT ON YOUR THIRD EYE. It must be done on any of the dates 
given below. Mercury must be powerful or you will be wasting your time. 


All at once: 


1. Fold your hands, but extend your little fingers at the ends and connect 
them, all the way down, the little fingers and the Mercury mounts of your 
palms should be solidly connected. 


2. Focus on your throat chakra and visualize it as a spinning blue vortex. 
3. Breathe in energy directly from the full Moon into your throat chakra 


4. Chant/vibrate "NEBO” on the exhale. You need to adjust your pitch to 
*feel* it in your throat chakra. Chant this with one long exhale. 


N-N-N-AY-AY-AY-B-B-B-B-OH-OH-OH-OH 


Chant this 12 times, while focusing on your throat chakra and holding the mudra 
with your hands. This mediation should be performed under the waxing full 
Moon, when Mercury is most powerful. 


VARIATION: 

| had much success with chanting “NINNGHIZHIDDA.” Thoth (Ninnghizhida) 
rules the throat chakra of communication. In the book, it gives for the chant. My 
advice is to choose whichever chant you feel attracted to. 


2012 

January: 

Mercury will be exalted in Aquarius from January 27th, at 18:13 through February 
14th , at 01:39 


May: 
Mercury will be at home in Gemini from May 24th, at 11:13 through Jun 7th, at 
11:17 


September 


Mercury is again direct in its home sign of Virgo from September ‘st, at 02:33 
through September 16th, at 23:23 


77 


78 


Necronomicon Heart Chakra Meditation 


DO NOT ATTEMPT THIS MEDITATION UNLESS YOU ARE ALREADY IN THE 
PROGRAM AND HAVE USED IT FOR YOUR OTHER CHAKRAS (THIRD EYE, 
THROAT). 


There are two steps to this meditation, given this chakra is a stepping off point 
and connector for the higher and lower chakras and its symbol is the symbol of 
water merging with fire- originally the Gebo rune. Astaroth/Inanna rules this 
chakra. 


1. Go outside under the full Moon when it is at its brightest (preferably). 


2. On the inhale, breathe in and visualize shining liquid silver energy from the 
Moon going into and brightening your heart chakra. This energy looks like liquid 
Mercury and is in a stream from the Moon. 


3. On the exhale, drop your head so you can feel the vibration in your heart 
chakra, but not tight, just resting and vibrate/chant Inanna: 
“E-E-E-E-E-E-N-N-N-N-A-A-A-A-A-H-H-H-H-H-N-N-N-N-N-A-A-A-A-H-H-H-H-H.” 


4. Do this exactly 15 times. 


The very next day, go out under the Sun and do the same as the above, this time 
using liquid gold energy: 
1. Go outside under the Sun when it is at its brightest (preferably). 


2. On the inhale, breathe in and visualize shining liquid gold energy from the Sun 
going into and brightening your heart chakra like white- gold. 


3. On the exhale, drop your head so you can feel the vibration in your heart 
chakra, but not tight, just resting and vibrate/chant Inanna: 


“E-E-E-E-E-E-N-N-N-N-A-A-A-A-A-H-H-H-H-H-H-N-N-N-N-N-A-A-A-A-H-H-H-H.” 
4. Do this exactly 15 times. 

2012 

January: 


Venus is exalted in Pisces from January 14th, at 05:48 through February 8th, at 
06:02 


March: 
Venus is at home in Taurus from March 5th, at 10:26 through April 3rd, at 15:19 


October: 
Venus is at home in Libra from October 28th, at 13:05 through November 22nd, 
at 01:21 


79 


80 


Necronomicon Solar Chakra Meditation 


DO NOT ATTEMPT THIS MEDITATION UNLESS YOU ARE ALREADY IN THE 
PROGRAM AND HAVE USED IT FOR YOUR OTHER CHAKRAS (THIRD EYE, 
THROAT AND HEART). 


This meditation should be done during the day and preferably directly under the 
Sun between the hours of 10 am and 2 pm (14:00) when the Sun is at its most 
powerful. 


1. Fold your hands. Now, straighten only your ring fingers so they are 
touching. The rest of your fingers remain folded. 


2. Focus on your solar plexus chakra and visualize it spinning. Make sure it 
is aligned properly, point up. 


3. Breathe in energy from the sun into your solar chakra 


4. On the exhale, drop your head so you can feel the vibration in your solar 
chakra and vibrate "Shamash." 
S-S-H-H-H-H-H-AH-AH-AH-AH-M-M-M-M-M-AH-AH-AH-AH-S-S-H-H-H-H 


5. Do the above inhale and exhale with vibration 20 times. 


2012 
March: 
The Sun is exalted in Aries from March 20th at 05:16 through April 19th at 16:13 


July: 
The Sun is at home in Leo from July 22nd at 10:02 through August 22nd at 
17:08 


2013 
March: 
The Sun is exalted in Aries from March 20th at 11:03 through April 19th at 22:04 


July: 
The Sun is at home in Leo from July 22nd at 15:57 through August 22nd at 
23:03 


81 


82 


Necronomicon Sacral Chakra Meditation 


DO NOT ATTEMPT THIS MEDITATION UNLESS YOU ARE ALREADY IN THE 
PROGRAM AND HAVE USED IT FOR YOUR OTHER CHAKRAS (THIRD EYE, 
THROAT, HEART, AND SOLAR CHAKRAS). 


This meditation should be done at night and only on the dates given. Check your 
local times for exact planetary alignments. 


1. Focus on your sacral chakra. Breathe energy into this chakra and on the 
exhale, drop your head so you can feel the vibration in your solar chakra 
and vibrate "NERGAL." 

N-N-N-AY-AY-R-R-R-G-G-G-AY-AY-L-L-L 
Be sure to roll your R's 


2. Do the above eight times. 


2012 

August: 

Mars is in its co-ruling home in Scorpio from August 23rd, at 15:24 through 
October 7th, at 03:21 


November: 
Mars is exalted in Capricorn from November 17th, at 02:36 through December 
26th, at 00:48 


2013 

March: 

Mars is in its home sign of Aries from March 12th at 06:27 through April 20th at 
11:49 


83 


84 


Necronomicon Crown Chakra Meditation 


DO NOT ATTEMPT THIS MEDITATION UNLESS YOU ARE ALREADY IN THE 
PROGRAM AND HAVE USED IT FOR YOUR OTHER CHAKRAS (THIRD EYE, 
THROAT, HEART, SOLAR AND SACRAL CHAKRAS). 


1. Focus on your crown chakra. Breathe energy into this chakra and on the 
exhale, vibrate "MARDUK" 
M-M-M-AH-AH-R-R-R-TH-TH-TH-OO-OO-OO-K-K-K 
Be sure to roll your R's. The K is guttural and made as a soft hacking 
sound in the back of the throat. 


2. Do the above ten times 


2013 - 2014 
June: 
June 26th at 01:41 through July 16th 2014, Jupiter is exalted in Cancer 


85 


86 


Necronomicon Base Chakra Meditation 


DO NOT ATTEMPT THIS MEDITATION UNLESS YOU ARE ALREADY IN THE 
PROGRAM AND HAVE USED IT FOR YOUR OTHER CHAKRAS (THIRD EYE, 
THROAT, HEART, SOLAR, SACRAL AND CROWN CHAKRAS). 


1. Focus on your base chakra. Breathe energy into this chakra and on the 
exhale drop your chin to your chest and vibrate "NINIB" 
N-N-N-N-E-E-E-E-N-N-N-E-E-E-B-B-B- 

2. Do the above four times 


2010 - 2012 
July 22" 2010 — October 3 2012, Saturn is exalted in Libra. 


87 


88 


Opening the Ninth and Tenth Gates- the Shoulder Chakras 


There are no planetary alignments given for these. | performed this meditation 
successfully. It was powerful and strongly stimulated my base chakra. The color 
of these chakras according to the Necronomicon Grimoire is the "darkest purple. 


1. Focus on your left shoulder chakra, drop your chin to your chest and 
vibrate: "YUGGOTH." 
Y-Y-Y-OO0-00-00-G-G-G-G-OH-OH-OH-TH-TH-TH 


2. Do the above nine times. 


For the Ninth Chakra: 
1. Focus on your right shoulder chakra, drop your chin to your chest, and 
vibrate: KRYTHNON. 
K-K-K-K-R-R-R-Y-Y-Y-Y-TH-TH-TH-TH-N-N-N-OH-OH-OH-N-N-N 


2. Do the above nine times. 


89 


BERSERKER 


BOOKS