<>'  Or I. 


' . / / ' j/1  v 

7li~^ 


fa 


'3! 


REMARKS  ON  HYSTERIA, 


IN  CONNECTION  WITH 


HYDROPHOBIA, 


AND  OTHER  CONVULSIVE  AFFECTIONS, 


WITH  A GLANCE  INTO  THE  MESMERIC  MYSTERY. 


C ?' y AU  )• 


BY  JOHN  DALZIEL,  M.D. 


FACTS  AND  ARGUMENTS. 


EDINBURGH: 

PUBLISHED  BY  ADAM  AND  CHARLES  BLACK. 

1853. 


Printed  by  Wm.  Gilciirist,  145  Argyle  Street,  Glasgow. 


PRELIMINARY  STATEMENT. 


i 

Upwards  of  twenty  years  ago,  a brief  outline  of  the 
following  Remarks  appeared  in  the  Glasgow  Medical 
Journal,  interspersed  with  sufficiently  complimentary 
editorial  criticism.  For  the  satisfaction  of  the  reader, 
the  entire  article,  as  published  in  that  journal,  is  sub- 
joined. 

The  original  ( in  extenso)  is  now  evoked  from  its 
long  slumber  by  the  sympathetic  tones  of  Dr  Marshall 
Hall,  of  London’s  ingenious  disquisitions,  lately  pub- 
lished in  the  Lancet. 

In  now  submitting  his  views  to  the  public,  the 
author  trusts  he  is  animated  by  higher  motives  than 
the  mere  desire  of  proving  a priority  of  discovery 
over  a rival  writer : — He  aims  at  the  furtherance  of 
the  cause  of  truth.  His  argument  is  this  : — There  is  a 
striking  coincidence,  without  concert,  between  his 
own  leading  principles  and  those  of  Dr  Hall.  Now 
the  very  fact  of  a coincidence  of  this  kind  is,  in  sound 
logic,  a strong  a priori  argument  that  the  speculations 
of  the  respective  authors  are  founded  in  truth. 

There  is  yet  another  reason  for  the  present  publi- 
cation : — It  supplements,  in  several  points,  the  views 
of  Dr  Hall.  What  these  points  are  it  is  unnecessary 


for  tho  author  here  even  to  mention.  They  will  be 
readily  singled  out  by  any  who  may  choose  to  take 
the  trouble  of  doing  so  ; and  their  importance  will, 
he  trusts,  be  duly  estimated  by  the  profession  at  large. 


November,  1852. 


REMARKS,  Ac. 


It  was  from  observing  the  phenomena  which  pre- 
sent themselves  in  cases  of  hysteria  that  I was  first 
led  to  take  the  general  views  I am  about  to  explain 
of  the  nature  of  nervous  diseases.  j 

I was  particularly  struck  with  a case  which  occurred 
to  me  about  the  beginning  of  June,  1829.  The 
patient,  a country  woman  about  35  or  40  years  of 
age,  of  Herculean  strength  and  robust  constitution, 
had  a hysterical  paroxysm  of  dreadful  severity.  It 
lasted  from  a quarter  of  an  hour  to  twenty  minutes, 
and  agitated,  in  succession,  the  various  groups  of 
muscles  by  which  the  different  voluntary  movements 
of  the  body  are  effected.  During  the  paroxysm  there 
were  evident  symptoms  of  determination  of  blood  to 
the  head,  heaving  of  the  shoulders,  and  a loud 
wheezing  noise  attendant  on  respiration.  There 
were,  however,  momentary  intervals  of  comparative 
quiescence,  while  the  morbid  action  was  shifting  from 
oue  group  of  muscles  to  another,  the  wheezing  and 
heaving  of  the  shoulders  suffering  a very  considerable 
abatement,  almost  to  extinction  ; and,  during  these 
intervals,  the  patient  was  able,  faintly,  to  articulate  a 
syllable  or  two,  as  if  the  paroxysm  had  completely 
expended  its  force.  The  recurrence  of  the  wheezing, 
however,  with  the  consequent  heaving  of  the  shoulders, 
was  uniformly  a fresh  signal  of  attack  in  some  other 
quarter,  till  the  convulsive  agitation  had  run  nearly 


6 


i 

the  whole  round  of  the  muscular  system.  Tho 
Avheezing,  moreover,  appeared  to  my  ear  to  proceed 
solely  from  the  larynx. 

Instead  of  endeavouring  to  explain  the  inductive 
process  by  which,  in  reflecting  on  the  preceding  and 
other  similar  cases,  I was  led  to  adopt  the  following 
opinions,  it  will  be  better,  as  appears  to  me,  both  for 
the  sake  of  brevity  and  perspicuity,  to  explain  them 
in  a synthetical  way.  They  may  be  comprised  in  the 

I three  following  propositions  : — 

1st.  That  the  globus  hystericus,  as  well  as  the 
similar  affection  of  the  throat  in  hydrophobia,  oc- 
casioned by  the  idea,  &c.,  of  liquids,  is  a spasmodic 
stricture  of  the  muscles  of  the  throat,  {glottis,)  where- 
by respiration  is  obstructed. 

2d.  That  obstructed  respiration,  whether  suspended 
or  impeded,  occasions  cerebral  congestion,  as  well  as 
that  feeling  of  general  uneasiness,  designated  sensation 
of  suffocation,  which  attends  the  paroxysmal  exacerba- 
tion in  both  the  diseases  under  consideration : — and 
3d.  That  cerebral  congestion,  and  the  sensation  of 
suffocation,  separately  or  conjointly,  may,  especially 
in  an  irritable  habit,  occasion  Convulsion. 

Admitting  the  truth  of  these  propositions,  it 
naturally  follows  that,  as  a palliative  measure  in  the 
treatment  of  hydrophobia,  the  operation  of  Broncho- 
tomy  might  be  expected  to  ward  off,  or  at  least  abate 
the  violence  of  the  convulsive  paroxysm.  And,  there 
are  other  consequences,  (afterwards  to  be  noticed) 

I equally,  or  still  more  injurious,  which  this  measure 
would  tend  directly  to  obviate. 

The  efficacy  of  the  operation  for  one  or  other  of 
the  purposes  specified  will,  of  course,  depend  on  the 


7 


truth  of  the  preceding  propositions.  I am  aware, 
however,  that  there  are  certain  points  in  them  that 
may  be  considered  doubtful ; and  therefore,  premising 
a few  general  observations,  I shall  attempt  to  occupy 
the  debatable  ground. 

I may  be  allowed  to  state,  in  limine,  that  as  the 
following  Remarks  are  principally  intended  for  the 
elucidation  of  hydrophobia,  any  references  to  hysteria 
are  to  be  understood  as  illustrations  of  principles  com- 
mon to  both  these  diseases;  and  that,  though  obstruct- 
ed respiration  be  not,  in  every  case,  competent  to  the 
production  of  convulsion  in  healthy  individuals,  yet 
in  the  subject  of  each  of  these  diseases  there  is  a 
peculiar  irritability  of  constitution,  previous  to  the 
incursion  of  the  paroxysms — Hydrophobia  is  fre- 
quently ushered  in  by  flyiug  spasms  over  the  body, 
and  hysterical  women  are  subject  to  the  same  affec- 
tions. All  that  is  contended  for  is,  that  obstructed 
respiration,  acting  upon  this  irritability,  may  be  the 
occasion  of  its  characteristic  development  in  the  form 
of  a convulsive  paroxysm.  But  on  the  modifying 
cause,  or  that  peculiarity  of  diathesis  which  makes  a 
hysterical  differ  from  a hydrophobic  paroxysm,  1 offer 
uo  conjecture  ; and  on  the  proximate  cause  of  hys- 
teria, and  the  origin  of  hydrophobia,  i.  e.,  the  ques- 
tion whether  it  originate  from  a specific  poison,  or  be 
only  the  result  of  simple  irritation,  I shall  also  be 
silent.  It  is  enough  for  the  present  purpose  to  be 
assured  that  there  has  been  in  operation  a cause  of 
some  description,  sufficient  to  excite  that  degree  of 
irritability  which  exists  on  the  first  manifestation  of 
water-dread.  The  leading  object  of  these  remarks 
is,  to  combat  that  intractable  distemper  usually 


8 


described  under  the  appellations  of  Hydrophobia, 
Rabies,  Lyssa , &c 

The  first  proposition,  then,  as  regards  hysteria,  is 
pretty  distinctly  recognised  by  Dr  Cullen,  in  his 
observations  on  that  disease  ; and,  in  respect  to 
hydrophobia,  it  is  also  admitted  that  the  attempt  to 
drink,  the  mere  idea  of  drinking,  or  of  liquids,  excites 
“ a spasmodic  constriction  of  the  muscles  of  the  pha- 
rynx,” (extending,  of  course,  to  those  of  the  larynx,) 
whereby  respiration  is  obstructed : and  that  a sen- 
sation of  suffocation  and  a convulsive  paroxysm  ensue. 

Now  it  is  my  express  object  to  show  that  the  con- 
vulsion is  to  be  attributed  entirely,  though  indirectly, 
to  obstructed  respiration,  and  not  to  the  accompanying 
i circumstance  of  the  local  spasm,  or  pain  attendant 
on  the  spasm.  The  competency  of  obstructed  respi- 
ration to  occasion  convulsion  will  be  fully  made  out 
by  establishing  the  second  and  third  propositions  ; but 
the  second  tenn  of  the  second  proposition,  and  the 
first  of  the  third  are  also  admitted.  The  only  link 
awanting,  then,  to  complete  the  chain,  is  the  proof 
that  obstructed  respiration  produces  cerebral  con- 
gestion. If  the  one  can  be  shown  to  be  the  invariable 
result  of  the  other,  the  theory  is  complete  ; but, 
though  there  may  not  in  every  instance  succeed 
cerebral  congestion,  there  will  uniformly  be  found  the 
sensation  of  suffocation  ready  as  a substitute. 

On  the  question,  whether  Suspended  respiration 
produce  cerebral  congestion,  the  opinions  of  different 
authors  seem  strangely  discordant.  Some  state  it 
as  the  uniform  result  of  their  observations  on  the 
brains  of  the  drowned,  that  the  vessels  of  that  organ 
were  completely  distended  with  blood  ; others,  again, 


9 


report  the  very  reverse.  The  latter  position  is  as- 
sumed by  Dr  Curry,  and  defended  by  Dr  Good  ; but 
the  former  seems  to  be  held  by  our  highest  medico- 
legal authority,  Dr  Beck,  with  the  exception  of  those 
cases  where  syncope  from  terror  or  other  causes  has 
occurred  at  the  moment  of  submersion.  * 

It  would  be  unfair  to  impugn  the  veracity  of  either 
party  ; but  the  truth  seems  to  be  that  this  appear- 
ance is  sometimes  present  and  sometimes  wanting. 
Now  the  fact  of  its  occasional  presence  may  almost 
be  admitted  as  a proof  of  the  natural  tendency  of 
suspended  respiration  to  produce  it  ; and  its  absence 
may  be  accounted  for  by  the  resistance  of  the  coats 
of  the  blood  vessels  to  the  distending  power.  Those 
who  deny  cerebral  congestion  from  drowning,  too,  be 
it  recollected,  deny  it  in  opposition  to  the  exploded 
notion  that  drowning  or  hanging  kills,  chiefly,  by  in- 
ducing apoplexy.  Now  an  excessive  degree  of  cere- 
bral compression  produces  profound  torpor  ; a slight 
degree,  convulsion. 

Indeed  the  nature  of  the  case  suggests  to  any  per- 
son that  there  must  be  an  accumulation,  more  or  less, 
in  the  vessels  of  the  brain,  consequent  on  the  sudden 
suspension  of  respiration,  whether  or  not  it  amount 
to  such  a degree  as  to  be  sufficient  to  produce  apo- 
plexy, or  to  be  cognizable  by  the  senses  on  dissection. 
For,  after  a complete  expiration  (as  will  happen  in 
drowning)  the  transmission  of  blood  through  the 
lungs,  and,  consequently,  its  return  from  the  head  is 
prevented,  while  the  pulsation  of  the  heart  continues 
to  send  fresh  supplies  to  the  head. 


* Vide  Beck’s  Medical  Jurisprudence,  3d  ed.  p.  292-4. 


10 


The  event  will  be  the  same  when  respiration  is 
suddenly  suspended  after  a full  inspiration.  For,  when 
a person  takes  a full  breath,  holds  his  mouth  and  nose, 
or,  which  is  less  objectionable,  shuts  the  aperture  of 
the  glottis,  by  calling  into  action  the  appropriate 
muscles  of  the  larynx,  and  then  makes  a forcible 
effort  at  expiration,  which  a hydrophobic  patient,  in 
such  circumstances,  one  would  think,  could  scarcely 
refrain  from,  he  is  conscious  of  a rush  of  blood  to 
the  head.  The  same  event  happens,  upon  similar 
principles,  during  vomiting.  This  is  au  essential  point, 
and  I shall  immediately  have  occasion  to  recur  to  it. 

But,  turning  from  the  effects  of  suspended  to  those 
of  impeded  respiration,  the  argument  will  gain  au 
additional  degree  of  strength. 

Dr  Good,  as  has  already  been  stated,  denies  that 
there  is  any  cerebral  congestion  from  drowning,  or 
suddenly  suspended  respiration.  In  death  from  hang- 
ing and  from  respiring  nox'ous  vapors,  congestion,  he 
alleges,  is  sometimes  present  and  sometimes  wanting. 
If  the  rope  has  been  properly  applied,  and  the  “ occlu- 
sion of  the  trochea  complete,”  and  if  the  noxious  vapors 
have  been  in  a sufficiently  concentrated  state,  so  that 
respiration,  in  both  cases,  be  instantly  and  completely 
suspended,  there  will  not,  he  maintains,  be  any  cere- 
bral congestion.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  rope 
be  “bunglingly  applied,”  so  as  to  admit  a small  current 
of  air  along  the  trochea,  and,  if  the  noxious  vapors 
be  to  a certain  degree  diluted  with  atmospheric  air, 
respiration  and  circulation  will  be  feebly  prolonged, 
and,  in  both  cases,  he  admits,  there  will  be  cerebral 
congestion,  (convulsions,  according  to  Dr  Beck,)  and 
finally,  apoplexy  or  profound  torp  >r. 


11 


There  is,  however,  an  obvious  specialty  in  each  of 
these  cases  of  protracted  suffering,  which  requires  for 
each  of  them  a different  explanation.  The  pressure 
of  the  rope,  in  imperfect  hanging,  may  be  alleged  as 
partly  the  cause  of  congestion  ; but  this  effect,  from 
noxious  inhalations,  mint  arise  solely  from  the  par- 
tial permeability  of  the  lungs,  (attendant  on  impeded 
respiration,)  while  they  transmit  so  much  blood  as 
maintains  the  action  of  the  heart.  This  appears  to 
be  Dr  Beck’s  explanation  * 

Now  if  impeded  respiration,  while  the  lungs  are 
still  partially  permeable,  be  capable  of  producing  the 
effect,  it  may  be  argued,  a fortiori,  that  suspended 
respiration,  as  in  drowning,  while  these  organs  are 
scarcely,  if  at  all  permeable,  will  produce  it  much 
more  effectually  ; and  the  reason  why  there  has  been 
detected,  in  dissection,  a greater  degree  of  turgescence 
of  the  vessels  within  the  skulls  of  those  who  have  died 
from  inhaling  noxious  vapors,  than  of  those  who  have 
suffered  from  drowning,  may  be  partly  found  in  the 
adage  — Gutta  carat  lapidem,  non  vi  sed,  scope  cadendo, 
A comparatively  slight  degree  of  distending  force 
longer  applied,  or  more  frequently  repeated,  has  pro- 
duced visible  effects,  which  a greater  degree  of  the 
same  force,  only  once  applied,  has  been  incapable  of 
manifesting. 

Now,  in  transferring  this  doctrine  to  hydrophobia, 
tlmre  will  be  found  another  speciality — the  subject 
adverted  to  in  page  10 — which  will  bear  up  the  argu- 
ment on  the  one  side,  as  it  is  supported  on  the  other 
by  these  analagous  cases.  In  these,  viz  , drowning 

* Vide  Medical  Jurisprudence,  3d  cd  , p.  278. 


yo 


12 


and  suffocation  by  noxious  vapors,  there  is  no  barrier 
to  the  extrusion  of  air  from  the  lungs,  and  the  accu- 
mulation of  blood  in  the  head  must  take  place  princi- 
pally after  the  acts  of  expiration,  when  the  lungs  are 
least  permeable  ; for,  after  inspiration,  when  the  chest 
is  fully  dilated,  their  permeability  is  complete.  In 
hydrophobia,  however,  respiration  may  be  suspended 
after  either  inspiration  or  expiration.  When  it  hap- 
pens after  expiration,  the  arguments  just  now  ad- 
vanced will  directly  apply  ; and,  when  it  is  suspended 
after  inspiration,  that  speciality  already  noticed  is 
equally  valid,  viz.,  that  in  such  an  event  the  extrusion 
of  air  from  the  lungs  is  prevented  bjr  the  spasm  of  the 
throat,  while  there  will  at  the  same  time  be  a power- 
ful effort  at  expiration  ; and  the  consequence,  as  has 
already  been  stated,  will  be  determination  of  blood 
to  the  head.  That  respiration  is  frequently  suspended 
or  materially  interrupted  at  this  period,  and  attended 
with  this  effort,  seems  almost  demonstrable  from  the 
fact  that  the  lungs,  or  neighbouring  parts,  are  fre- 
quently found  emphysematous  on  dissection— an  ap- 
pearance which  cannot  be  accounted  for  on  other 
principles.  These  organs,  so  circumstanced,  are 
forcibly  compressed  by  the  action  of  the  expiratory 
muscles.  The  Pneumatosis  Hysterica  of  Dr  Cullen, 
too,  seems  an  illustration  of  the  same  principle. 

The  whole  history  of  hysteria,  indeed,  and  espe- 
cially its  occasional  termination  in  epilepsy,  goes  to 
prove  that  cerebral  congestion  is  the  immediate  cause 
of  the  paroxysm.  Flushing  of  the  face  is  a common 
symptom,  and  its  occasional  absence,  with  paleness  in 
its  room,  may  readily  be  accounted  for,  by  admitting 
that  the  disease  is  combined,  or  alternates  with  syn- 


13 


cope,  or  a partial  cessation  of  the  action  of  tho  heart. 
In  hydrophobia,  however,  we  meet  with  no  such  ten- 
dency to  syncope,  consequent  on  the  water-dread,  but 
a state  the  very  reverse  of  syncope. 

To  suspended  or  impeded  respiration  may,  in  gene- 
ral, be  attributed  infantile  convulsions* — those  attend- 
ant on  parturition — on  foreign  bodies  in  the  windpipe 
— and  on  local  irritations, — convulsions,  in  short,  of 
every  description,  excepting  those  which  arise  imme- 
diately from  primary  disease  of  the  brain,  and  even 
the  post-mortem  appearances  of  that  organ  may  fre- 
quently be  the  effects  of  suspended  respiration,  con- 
sequent upon  local  irritations. 

There  is  not  room  here  to  particularize  ; but,  in 
the  meantime,  I would  suggest  the  following  explana- 
tion, already  hinted  at,  of  the  connexion  between 
local  irritations  and  convulsions,  generally 

Under  acute  local  pain,  as  in  violent  muscular 
exertions,  there  is  an  instinctive  effort  to  “ hold  hard 
the  breath,”  as  it  is  phrased,  with  the  view  of  palliat- 
ing the  suffering,  and  giving  effect  to  our  muscular 
ex  rtions.  But  in  these  cases  the  breath  is  “ held 

* The  Author  has,  on  numerous  occasions,  by  personal  inter- 
ference ancl  instructions,  prevented  infantile  convulsions.  His 
instructions  are  : to  watch  the  first  manifestations  of  Interrupted 
Respiration,  and  to  make  an  impression  over  the  muscles  of  res- 
piration,— an  impression  varying,  in  degree,  from  gentle  friction 
to  a smart  fillip,  which,  in  cases  of  still-birth,  also,  the  Author 
believes  to  be  a more  instant  and  effectual  remedy  than  any  other, 
with  the  exception,  perhaps,  of  his  own  “ Apparatus  for  promoting 
Respiration,  &c.”  An  account  of  the  practical  working  of  this 
apparatus,  in  the  Humane  Society's  apartments,  in  Leith,  may  bo 
found  in  the  Edinburgh,  Medical  Journal  for  July,  1843  or  1844, 
or  thereby. — J.D. — November,  1832. 


9 


14 


hard”  solely  by  the  muscles  of  the  larynx.  For, 
whether  we  suppose  the  muscles  of  inspiration  to  be 
in  a state  of  total  abeyance  or  not,  it  may  be  safely 
affirmed  that  the  action  of  the  expiratory  muscles  pre- 
dominates, and  that  just  in  proportion  to  the  effort 
which  we  think  we  are  conscious  of  making  to  hold  in 
the  breath  will  be  the  actual  effort  at  expiration,  and 
the  tendency  of  blood  to  the  head  in  the  same  ratio. 
Apoplexy,  induced  by  violent  muscular  exertion,  is 
a practical  illustration.'* 

A full  inspiration,  we  know,  becomes  subservient 
to  violent  muscular  efforts,  by  affording  additional 
leverage  to  the  muscles  ; and  “ holding  hard  the 
breath  ” may  perhaps  mitigate  the  violence  of  pain 
by  inducing  cerebral  compression.  + By  whatever 
mode  of  action,  however,  this  is  the  opiate — the  grand 
panacea  which  nature  administers  to  alleviate  the 
violence  of  pain  of  every  description.  Convulsion  is 
a rare  effect,  considering  the  frequency  of  the  appli- 

* Did  not  Mr  Liston’s  patient,  who  died  apoplectic  after  the 
operation  of  Lithotomy,  sacrifice  his  life  to  his  own  pusillanimity 
by  “ holding  too  hard  the  breath”  during  the  operation?  Can 
the  advice  commonly  tendered  during  parturition  be  too  severely 
reprobated  ? On  this  principle  may  not  symptomatic  fever  be  in 
a great  measure  explained ; and,  may  not  the  various  visceral, 
especially  cerebral  and  pulmonary  lesions,  which  supervene  on 
operations  and  accidents,  be  referred  to  this  cause  ? Is  not  cere- 
bral congestion  in  fever,  etc.,  often  directly  attributable  to  the 
failure  or  fatigue  of  the  respiratory  muscles  ? Is  not  sleep,  in  a 
great  measure,  to  be  attributed  to  fatigue  of  the  respiratory  mus- 
cles ? Its  cessation  is  generally  announced  by  their  preternatural 
exertion — a full  inspiration. 

f It  may  either  be  supposed  to  act  in  this  manner,  or  as  a 
counter-irritant,  combating  a local  by  a general  uneasiness.  It 
may  possibly  act  in  both  ways. 


15 


cation  ; and,  when  it  does  occur,  marks  only  an  ex- 
cessive dose,  or  too  protracted  a use  of  the  remedy, 
or  shows  some  idiosyncrasy  in  the  individual  which 
disqualifies  him  from  participating  of  it  with  safety. 
We  havo  here  then,  a remedy,  like  many  others, 
which,  according  to  circumstances,  is  capable  either 
of  answering,  to  a certain  extent,  the  purpose  for 
which  it  was  intended,  or  of  creating  an  evil  of  a 
more  aggravated  description  than  that  which  it  was 
intended  to  alleviate.  For,  though  the  suspension  of 
respiration  be  often  voluntarily  resorted  to,  for  the 
mitigation  of  pain,  it  originates  the  uneasy  feeling  of 
suffocation,  which,  preponderating  at  last,  forces  us  to 
desist ; and,  when  it  is  involuntarily  obtruded  upon  us, 
even  in  a state  of  health,  is  at  all  times  a source  of 
extreme  uneasiness,  which  (within  certain  limits) 
increases  in  intensity  with  the  continuance  of  the 
privation. 

Now,  waving  the  question  of  cerebral  congestion 
altogether, — making  no  account  of  that  irritation  of 
the  brain  which  a certain  undue  degree  of  pressure 
upon  that  organ,  while  under  pre-existing  disease,  is 
calculated  to  produce, — we  think  the  intensely  uneasy 
feeling  of  suffocation  may  rationally  enough  be  al- 
lowed to  be  a powerful  auxiliary  in  the  production  of 
convulsion,  if  not  a cause  adequate  to  the  effect.  For, 
it  is  with  difficulty  if  we  can  repress  the  agitatory 
movements  of  a limb  suffering  severe  uneasiness  of 
any  kind,  and  this  is  an  iutense  uneasiness  in  which 
the  whole  system  participates,  with  a tendency  at  the 
same  time  to  a state  of  iuconsciousness.  Wherefore 
docs  an  animal  die  convulsed  under  the  exhausted 
receiver  of  an  air  pump  l Though  from  concomitant 


10 


circumstances  this  cannot  he  regarded  as  demonstra- 
tive proof  of  the  immediate  connexion  between  sus- 
pended respiration  and  convulsion,  it  yet  affords 
another  presumption  in  addition  to  the  evidence 
already  adduced.  The  excessive  degree  of  pre- 
existent irritability  in  hydrophobia  will  account  for 
the  sudden  succession  of  the  convulsion  to  the  water- 
dread.  and  consequent  feeling  of  suffocation. 

Now,  considering  the  prominent  symptomological 
niche  it  occupies,  it  appears  strange  that  the  sensa- 
tion of  suffocation  or  suspended  respiration  in  the 
affections  more  immediately  under  consideration,  and 
in  all  other  cases  of  convulsion  where  it  is  mentioned 

0 

as  an  attendant,  should  have  hitherto  been  noticed 
only  as  forming  part  of  a confused  and  unconnected 
group  of  symptoms  rather  than  as  an  essential  link  of 
a chain  of  causes  and  effects.  All  the  three  propo- 
sitions, indeed,  which  the  present  theory  embraces, 
have,  at  one  time  or  another,  as  isolated  propositions, 
been  distinctly  recognised  ; but  I am  not  aware  that 
they  have  hitherto  been  catenated  into  a regular 
chain.  When  all  the  circumstances  that  they  em- 
brace meet,  and  are  realized  in  an  individual  sufferer, 
then  has  almost  every  bond  of  connexion,  as  cause 
and  effect,  escaped  the  observation  of  the  medical 
inquirer.  Dr  Cullen  (in  hysteria)  glances  rapidly 
from  the  first  to  the  two  last  links  of  the  chain — 
from  the  “ spasm  of  the  pharynx  ” to  the  affection 
of  tiie  brain,  and  the  consequent  paroxysm.  He  per- 
ceived the  hiatus,  but  candidly  confessed  himself 
unable  to  fill  it  up.  The  intermediate  links  of  ob- 
structed respiration  and  cerebral  congestion,  or  sensa- 
tion of  suffocation,  were  not  observed  as  connecting 


17 


links  of  that  chain  of  causation  which  I have  been 
attempting  to  delineate.  Yet  the  necessity  of  some 
connecting  medium  is  evidently  implied  in  the  lan- 
guage he  makes  use  of ; and  it  argues  much  for  his 
superior  sagacity  that,  at  the  time  he  lived,  he  should 
have  seen  the  necessity  of  a connecting  medium. 
For,  even  at  the  present  day,  it  is,  in  similar  cases, 
scarcely  ever  looked  for,  or  its  necessity  acknow- 
ledged ; but  the  two  extreme  links  are  set  down 
as  if  in  the  immediate  relation  of  cause  and  effect. 

Dr  Beck,  * in  describing  a method  formerly  resort- 
ed to,  in  Paris,  for  torturing  criminals,  evidently,  I 
think,  sanctions  this  notion.  “ The  mouth,”  says  he, 
“ being  forcibly  kept  open  with  a wedge,  and  the  nos- 
trils closed,  a great  quantity  of  water  was  poured 
into  the  person’s  throat.  Respiration  was  thus  pre- 
vented, while  the  irritation  of  the  trachea,  in  resisting 
the  access  of  fluid,  caused  faintings,  convulsions, 
violent  agitations  of  the  respiratory  organs,  rupture 
of  the  pulmonary  vessels,  spitting  of  blood,  and  death. 
On  dissection,  the  usual  lesions  observed  in  death 
from  submersion  were  apparent.”  Among  these 
lesions,  be  it  recollected,  too,  he  else\.  here  enumerates 
“ a greater  or  less  fulness  of  the  vessels  of  the  brain.’’ 
But  suspended  respiration  is  only  mentioned,  by  the 
way,  as  a concomitant,  rather  than  as  occupying  its 
proper  place  in  the  chain  of  consequences.  Indeed, 
as  far  as  I understand  it,  it  seems  to  be  the  plain  in- 
terpretation of  the  current  language  of  surgery,  that 
convulsions,  from  foreign  bodies  in  the  larynx,  are  the 

* He  gives  it  second  hand,  but  apparently  in  his  own  language. 
— Vide  Medical  Jurisprudence,  3d  cd.,  p.  297. 


18 


immediate  effects  of  the  local  irritation,  or  else  of  the 
local  spasm  immediately  consequent  on  that  irritation. 

1st.  That  the  local  irritation  is  the  immediate 
causo  seems  sufficiently  objectionable,  on  the  ground 
that  it  is  imputing  a general  effect  to  a particular  or 
local  causo.  Bofore  we  can  admit  local  irritation  to 
effect  convulsion,  we  must  suppose  that  the  irritation 
is  directly  or  indirectly  transmitted  to  the  brain,  and 
that  from  the  affection  of  this  organ  the  convulsion 
directly  emanates.  Now  I have  already  pointed  out 
an  indirect  mode  of  transmission.  But  it  may  be 
alleged  that  the  direct  is  going  on  at  the  same  time. 
This  may,  likewise,  be  true.  It  is  not  for  a moment 
to  be  imagined  that  proof  of  the  indirect,  in  certain 
circumstances,  necessarily  disproves  the  direct  trans- 
mission of  such  affections.  But  the  objections  to  the 
latter  are  founded  solely  on  what  is  conceived  to  be 
its  own  defective  merits, — as  a cause  inadequate  to 
the  effect,  even  allowing  direct  transmission  to  take 
place.  It  is  not,  however,  a settled  question  among 
physiologists,  whether,  in  common  sensations,  of 
which  this  is  a pure  example,  there  be  any  physical 
change  whatever  propagated  along  the  nerves,  from 
the  sentient  point  towards  the  brain.*  But,  even 
admitting  what  is  thus  doubtful,  I appeal  to  any  per- 
son capable  of  analyzing  his  own  feelings,  when  a drop 
of  liquid,  crumb  of  bread,  &c.,  come  in  contact  with 
the  glottis,  whether  he  suffer  more  uneasiness  from 
the  irritation  or  pain  which  these  substances  occasion, 
by  their  contact  with  the  tender  surface,  or  from  the 

* Vide  Dr  Thomas  Brown’ 9 Lectures  on  the  Philosophy  of  the 
Mind. — Lecture  XIX. 


19 


accompanying  sensation  of  suffocation,  and  consequent 
iolent  efforts  to  respire.  Even  when  aqua  vitce  has 
been  the  exciting  fluid,  it  may  be  stated,  in  plain 
terms,  that  the  actual  amount  of  pain  winch  imme- 
diately results  from  the  contact,  abstracted  from  the 
sensation  of  suffocation  and  its  consequents,  is,  de  facto. 
a merely  trifling  uneasiness,  and  barely  sufficient,  as 
is  too  often  proved  by  the  actual  passage  of  foreign 
bodies,  to  excite  the  adjoining  muscles  to  contraction 
The  glottis,  certainly,  presents  not  a more  tender  sur- 
face than  the  eye  ; and  who  ever  heard  of  convulsions 
from  a foreign  body  being  lodged  within  the  eyelids  ? 
The  moment  of  such  an  occurrence,  however,  similar 
to  what  happens  in  the  other  case,  there  is  a forcible 
contraction  of  the  orbicular  muscle. 

But  I cannot  make  a direct  transfer  of  this  doctrine 
to  hydrophobia,  seeing  there  is  such  a degree  of  pre- 
existent irritability,  and  a new  class  of  feelings — 
morbid  sensations — may  possibly  be  developed  by  the 
long  continued  local  irritation  of  the  throat.  By 
morbid  sensations  are  to  be  understood  such  feelings 
as  the  aura  epileptica, — those  lancinating  pains  which 
are  felt  darting  along  the  course  of  a nerve,  as  in  whit- 
low, &c  , when  the  nerve  may  be  supposed  to  be  in  a 
state  of  inflammation.  Such  a state  may,  perhaps, 
be  predicated  of  the  large  nerves  about  the  throat, 
in  the  course  of  this  disease  ; and,  from  the  proximity 
of  the  point  of  irritation  to  the  brain,  such  a physical 
change  of  the  state  of  these  nerves  may  be  directly 
propagated  along  their  course  to  the  Sensorium.  But, 
except  when  the  nerves  are  in  a morbid  state,  wo 
have  no  evidence  of  any  such  physical  change  being 
propagated  along  their  course  in  that  direction.  A 


20 


blow  or  pressure,  behind  the  internal  condyle  of  the 
humerus,  will  readily  occasion  a pain  along  the  course 
of  the  ulnar  nerve,  from  the  point  of  irritation  to  the 
extremities  of  the  ring  and  little  fingers  ; but  I have 
never  heard  that  the  pain  darts  from  the  same  point 
of  irritation,  brain- ward,  when  the  arm  is  in  a state  of 
health.  It  is  absolutely  necessary,  then,  to  distin- 
guish between  these  different  classes  of  sensations. 
To  the  class  of  common  sensations,  unquestionably, 
belongs  that  irritation  attendant  on  foreign  bodies 
in  the  windpipe  ; and,  although  the  irritation  be  pro- 
pagated along  the  nerves,  it  has  been  shown  that  in 
these  cases  it  is  insufficient  to  excite  convulsion,  and 
that,  therefore,  suspended  respiration  is  requisite  for 
the  production  of  that  particular  effect.  If  it  cannot 
be  denied,  then,  that  in  hydrophobia  convulsion  may, 
possibly , be  occasioned  by  the  direct  transmission  of 
the  morbid  sensations  to  the  brain,  it  can  as  little  be 
denied  that  it  will  as  readily  be  excited  by  that  in- 
direct communication  which  a simple  surgical  opera- 
tion is  quite  competent  to  intercept. 

2d.  That  the  local  spasm  may  gradually  diffuse 
itself,  from  muscle  to  muscle,  over  the  body,  seems 
another  possible  way  of  accounting  for  the  convulsion. 
As  this  seems  plausible  enough  at  first  view,  though 
I have  not  seen  it  directly  insisted  on,  I shall  make  a 
brief  estimate  of  the  amount  of  probability  on  the 
subject.  When  a muscle  is  for  any  length  of  time 
either  violently  exerted  or  put  on  the  stretch  by  its 
antagonist,  it  may,  especially  in  an  irritable  consti- 
tution, become  affected  with  spasm.  Any  muscle,  or 
class  of  muscles,  therefore,  may,  when  under  the  in- 
fluence of  spasm,  by  putting  their  antagonists  on  the 


21 


stretch,  subject  the  latter  to  the  same  affection  ; and 
I am  mistaken  if  something  like  this,  as  a subordinate 
law  in  the  diffusion  of  the  spasmodic  action  over  the 
body,  be  not  exemplified  in  tetanus*  But  I know  of 
no  other  relation  besides  that  of  antagonism,  in  virtue 
of  which  one  muscle  can  communicate  spasm  to 
another,  and  I believe  no  other  exists.  Now,  allow- 
ing such  a connexion  of  the  different  muscles  of  the 
body  to  exist,  as  to  render  it  possible  for  spasm  of 
the  muscles  of  the  throat  to  extend  itself,  in  this  way, 
over  the  body,  it  must  still  be  taken  into  account  that 
a considerable  time  must  elapse,  after  one  class  of 
muscles  are  affected,  before  the  spasmodic  influence 
can  be  communicated  to  their  antagonists.  The 
spasm  thus  communicated,  too,  is  of  the  rigid,  rather 
than  of  the  convulsive  character.  But  such  a manner 
of  accounting  for  the  convulsion,  in  hydrophobia,  will 
scarcely  be  resorted  to  ; and  I have  at  present  noticed 
these  laws  of  spasm  rather  with  the  view  of  reflecting 
light  on  that  singular  symptom,  from  which  the  disease 
takes  its  name — hydrophobia, — and  on  that  “ spas- 
modic constriction  of  the  muscles  of  the  chest  ” which 
Dr  Good  mentions  as  an  essential  symptom  of  the 
disease,  than  from  any  pressing  necessity  of  repelling 
objections  from  this  source. t 

* This  law,  in  tetanus,  seems  almost  entitled  to  another  appel- 
lation than  a “subordinate  law.”  To  this,  and  one  or  two  other 
physiological  laws,  perhaps  the  whole  phenomena  of  most  cases 
of  tetanus  may  he  referred. 

f In  connection  with  the  preceding  discussion,  and  closely  allied 
to  it,  the  Author  ofFers  the  following  exposition  of  the  leading  and 
indisputable  phenomena  of  Mesmerism  : — All  decided  mental 
affections  operate  directly  and  instantly,  like  a break  in  carriage* 
mechanism,  upon  the  function  of  Respiration.  The  initial  in- 


22 


A hydrophobic  patient  lias  little  appetite  for,  and 
generally  as  little  difficulty  in  swallowing,  solids,  while 
he  is  almost  invariably  incapable  of  swallowing  liquids, 
“ from  their  creating  a painful  convulsion  of  the  pha- 
rynx,” although  he  be  at  the  same  time  tormented 
with  thirst.*  The  very  sight  or  mere  idea  of  liquids  will 
often  produce  the  same  distressing  effects.  Curious 
enough  at  first  view  ! ! But  the  laws  of  deglu- 
tition, in  a state  of  health,  if  brought  rightly  to  bear 
upon  the  subject,  in  a great”  measure  explain  this 
apparently  incongruous  combination  of  symptoms. 
For,  it  is  generally  admitted,  and  it  is  palpable  to  com- 

fluence  extends,  of  course,  to  the  function  of  Circulation,  and 
the  Cerebral  and  Mental  functions.  Vary  or  complicate  the  ini- 
tial influence,  and  you  will,  accordingly,  have  a modified  result. 
The  Author  confines  himself,  at  present,  to  the  one  illustration 
already  indicated, — the  Mesmeric  “ series  of  changes.”  In  this 
process,  the  person  operated  upon  has  the  mental  faculty  of  Atten- 
tion rivetted  upon  the  operator.  Attention,  in  due  time,  operates 
the  series  of  changes  already- indicated,  commencing  with  Respi- 
ration. Here,  then,  is  the  initial  step  in  the  mysterious  pheno- 
mena,— the  germ  of  any  rational  solution  that  may  yet  be  offered 
of  this  queestio  vexata. 

The  exertion  of  the  faculty  of  Attention  alone,  however,  would 
produce  no  very  remarkable  final  result.  But,  additional  and 
modifying  mental  influences  are  simultaneously  brought  into 
operation.  The  exciting  Sentiments  of  Wonder  and  Veneration 
are  obviously  at  work  : and  their  eo-operation  seems  to  be  all  that 
is  necessary  for  producing  every  credible  result,  in  this  fruitful 
field  of  delusion,  imposture,  and  fraud. — J.  D. — November,  1S52. 

* If  the  patient  can  swallow  solid  food,  he  would  certainly  bear 
the  introduction  of  a flexible  tubo  into  the  oesophagus.  If  the 
sensation  of  thirst  proceed  from  the  stomach,  it  might  hereby  bo 
allayed.  The  attempt  might  be  renewed,  in  tetanus,  also,  pro- 
vided the  operation  of  bronchotomy  were  previously  performed. — 
Vide  Cooper’s  Surgical  Dictionary,  5th  ed.,  p.  1059. 


ON 


MESMERISM. 

Tlie  victim  of  tire  Mesmerist  alternately  wonders  and  worships,  and 
worships  and  wonders,  in  rapt  devotion,  at  the  shrine  of  a mountebank, 
till  the  whole  man— soul,  body,  and  spirit — is  engulphed  in  a vortex  of 
“Hero-worship.”  Is  rt  not  so?  O Carlyle!  In  the  depths  of  his 
moral  and  intellectual  abasement — in  the  thorough  prostration  of  the 
essential  attributes  of  “erect  manhood,”  the  really  rapt  pseudo-seer, 
the  living  automaton,  now  all- obsequious  to  the  will  of  another,  exhibits, 
in  his  own  person,  only  a miniature  type,  an  intensely  focalized  view  of 
what  You,  with  master-hand,  have  so  graphically  sketched,  or  repro- 
duced from  the  ample  Panorama  of  History — the  weaker-minded  mul- 
titude doing  homage  to  the  master-spirit,  the  “ Hero  ” of  the  scene. 

No  other  agency  than  what  is  here  alleged  is  really  necessary  to  do 

the  work  : and,  in  all  such  cases,  it  is  wnphilosophical  to  assume  more. 

So  taught  Sir  John  Leslie  ; and  other  high  authorities  acquiesce. 

Nec  Deus  intersit,  ni9i  dignus  vindlee  nodus.  ^ „ , 

God  never  employs  special  agency,  without  special  reasons.  ) 

Let  the  mystery-mongers  of  the  day,  the  arch-impostors  and  their 
dupes,  con  well  this  sage  maxim,  and  adopt  its  spirit  in  its  utmost  lati- 
tude of  application. 

The  con-generic  mystery  of  Table-tuniing,  which  has  recently  been 
so  ably  exposed  by  Sir  Michael  Faradv,  has  been  found  to  have  its  secret 
in  mental  power  ; and  in  the  analysis  of  the  phenomena  of  Water-dread 
— another  mysterious  subject,  discussed  in  the  succeeding  pages — I 
have  endeavoured  to  give  mental  agency  due  prominence,  and  nothing 
more.  This  analysis,  too,  discloses  no  new  element — no  new  principle 
of  action.  The  circumstances  indeed  are  peculiar ; but  the  laws  of 
action  under  which  Humanity  is  here  exhibited  are  stereotyped  for  the 
sound  and  healthy  of  all  time,  all  races,  and  all  climes. 

There  is  no  known  physical  power  in  the  universe  that  is  not  to  be 
found  in  active  operation  in  Humanity  itself.  But  it  has  in  addition 
the  stupendous  Power  of  mind  ; and  it  were  well  if  a due  knowledge  of 
this  Power  and  of  its  modus  operundi  were  in  more  general  use  as  au 
instrument  of  discovery  in  exploring  the  hidden  mysteries  of  our  com- 
plicated frame-work,  in  its  varied  states  of  health,  of  freak , and  of 
disease. 

.1.  D. 


Sy  Printed  by  IV.  C.  Craw,  Dumfries,  I3t/i  August,  1853 


- -*-4- 


' /Ay /-A-'k.-  ydXXf  /^-y'  /c-A^A*/  AL^X^UA/y 

X'A<^u — ^ , 

u/^  -•*—  " 


-Yst*-v  S/i* 


zAz-z-  Zv 


jj. 


^ <3<^L 


. . x w^  x 

/Si^.-%y.  yit.^i  c^y^-J  ^t%-e~  J^A-yy^~  dZyZe^^'lf-r.  iXL 

c Vy/z  /*.  ‘{/-t'J  A ■Z/'c'"/-<. e^.Ayf'Z  A '■ 


X-y  / s/.-aC^  y ^/^//z-i-zy-/  A'/A^-ALj’-. / , " t /yC^> 

' X,  ^Z*  -X£*.-sy 


~X—. 


'Ac-! 


•-,/>,;  ?%*_ 

../-z^A/- 

AyU-  (^-a^XuXa;  X~ 

X y/X  A <*-*-  • 

'^y  y?si  ^ /?  ./~y~7  ^y^y&yXs . yt-y  — /ts~A/%  s/t/ 


y *aP 

'y/t-A/l  y^/^yyfyy^l 

? A.- A -C^  At/ts'jfe- — - A^^^yi-zA/ay-e^. 

S’  . y . y JLs 


>y  At^f-f— 


/i^/Al  Z/iA^yXiZ-,-  x 

yX/y/s  y /Ai^  £//A?  ^XsztsO 

y/^A  yy-ii.-^.  Xz/XzaXZ-  Ay*/*—  Ayf"  | 

’z.^1-  aCauI)^^^-  yk^-  | 


// 


3 


/^-  /^-  Se^-y^  ^ *-  ^-1 


'j/is~A-i'/i--  — • y- — ■ s , -/  i| 

>&u  ,« 

./  //  >7  mu  ■ 


At/fc  — z£- 


■t?~z*s-t>-y 


y:/  y/yytyyJ^ //yA^A# 


—jX^  JyrA^yyC^y^ry  - XC/yX*  L^AL-yytLr^  ?. 


j yj)  / / t-^ *.  ^-^gB 

/^)  I 


/ l+'i  It- 


23 


mon  senso,  although  denied  by  Magendie,  that  it 
requires  a greater  effort,  because  a greater  degree  of 
coutraction  of  the  muscles  of  deglutition,  to  swallow 
a liquid  than  a solid. 

Now,  viewing  these  facts  in  relation  with  one  of  the 
laws  of  spasm  already  adverted  to,  the  mystery,  in  a 
great  measure,  vanishes  ; and,  still  farther,  when  we 
bear  in  mind  the  extreme  degree  of  irritability  which 
pervades  the  whole  system.  For,  if  violent  muscular 
exertion  be  sufficient  to  inflict  spasm  in  a state  of 
health,  we  may  reasonably  expect  the  same  occurrence 
from  no  unwonted  degree  of  contraction,  when  the 
disposition  to  spasm  or  general  irritability  is  wound 
up  to  almost  the  highest  pitch. 

Again,  there  is  not  only  a greater  degree  of  con- 
traction absolutely  required  of  the  muscles  of  deglu- 
tition, in  order  to  swallow  liquids,  than  is  necessary 
foe- swallowing  solids,  but,  from  the  sensation  of  thirst 
predominating  over  that  of  hunger,  the  solid  morsel 
will  be  grasped  with  comparative  indifference,  while 
the  refreshing  liquid,  provided  its  deglutition  be  at  all 
possible,  will  be  swallowed  with  avidity,  and  the  mus- 
cular contractions  performed  with  preternatural  force. 
Hence  the  painful  spasm,  the  origin  of  the  water  dread. 

Farther,  it  is  just  this  very  avidity  for  liquids,  by 
a single  degree  or  more  intensified,  which  precludes 
the  possibility  of  swallowing  them,  and  virtually  in- 
spires the  subsequent  dread.  The  muscles  of  deglu- 
tition are  • hereby  prompted,  not  only  to  a more 
vigorous,  but  also  to  a premature  discharge  of  func- 
tion, in  accordance  with  a familiar  law  of  the  mind, 
as  the  schoolboy,  from  excessive  eagerness  to  catch 
the  flying  ball,  opposes  its  course  with  clenched  fist 


24 


instead  of  open  hand.  The  function  of  deglutition 
is  actually  performed  with  alacrity  and  force,  but, 
from  being  performed  prematurely,  the  object  is  not 
attained,  while  the  suffering  attendant  on  the  effort 
excites  a horror  of  the  very  liquid,  in  the  extreme 
desire  for  which  the  painful  effort  originated.  The 
appetites  of  hunger  and  of  thirst  consist  each  of  two 
distinct  elements,  viz  , a painful  sensation  and  a desire 
for  that  which  is  calculated  to  allay  this  sensation. 
Now,  in  recording  this  complex  group  of  symptoms, 
the  desire  is  always  omitted.  “ The  patient  suffers 
from  thirst — a liquid  is  presented — its  presence  ex- 
cites distress — so  that  he  dare  not  now  attempt  to  drink , 
and  the  liquid  is  disliked All  this  is  true.  But  has 
he  not  also  previously  dared  to  desire  to  drink  ? And, 
by  a well  known  law  of  mind,  on  the  very  intensity 
of  this  desire  merging  prematurely  into  violition,  does 
not  the  whole  of  the  subsequent  train  of  suffering  and 
aversion  depend  ? 

It  is  by  this  desire  being  still  farther  heightened, 
and  in  combination  with  another  familiar  law  of  the 
mind,  that  the  mere  idea  of  liquids  becomes  capable 
of  producing  the  same  effects  as  their  actual  presence. 
For,  cceteris  paribus,  in  proportion  to  the  intensity  of 
our  desire  for  a distant  or  absent  object,  will  be  the 
vividness  of  our  ideas  of  it  ; and  metaphysicians  ge- 
nerally allow,  and  the  dictates  of  common  sense  teach 
us,  that  a very  vivid  idea  is  sufficient  to  produce  a 
temporary  belief  of  the  actual  presence  of  the  object,* 

* Dugald  Stewart,  in  his  “Philosophy  of  the  Intellectual 
Powers,”  argues  that  “the  idea,”  or,  according  to  the  more 
modern  expression,  “the  conception”  of  an  object  is  always 
accompanied  with  a temporary  belief  of  its  actual  presence. 


25 


and  an  object  passionately  desired  will  readily,  as  it  has 
been  shewn,  be  prematurely  grasped  at.  The  ideal, 
as  well  as  the  actual  presence  of  water,  will  thus  excite 
in  the  thirsty  hydrophobian  an  instinctive  and  irre- 
sistible desire  for  it,  and  a corresponding  effort  at 
swallowing  ; and  the  suffering  attendant  on  the  effort 
will,  in  rapid  succession,  occasion  a dread  of  the  very 
liquid  which,  but  a moment  before,  was  the  object  of 
an  intense  and  passionate  desire. 

It  is  upon  these  principles,  too,  that  we  are  to  ex- 
plain the  pre-eminent  dread  of  ivater.  It  is  just 
because  the  thirsty  hydrophobian,  like  every  other 
thirsty  creature,  has  a much  keener  relish  for  it  than 
for  any  other  beverage  that  he  manifests  on  its  ap- 
proach a more  appalling  expression  of  horror.* 

Such,  I conceive,  may  serve  for  the  resolution  of  a 
paradox,  which  has  thrown  an  air  of  romance  over  the 
whole  history  of  this  disease,  and  tempted,  I believe, 
even  some  professional  gentlemen  to  deny  its  exist- 
ence,— to  turn  away,  in  scepticism,  from  the  best 
accredited  records  of  apparently  mysterious  pheno- 
mena, which  they  would  not  pause  duly  to  examine, — 
“to  cut  in  phrensy  the  Gordian-knot  which  they  had 
not  patience  to  unravel.” 

From  the  laws  of  spasm,  already  adverted  to,  some 
light  is  also  reflected  upon  the  “ spasmodic  constric- 

* Water-dread  is  an  occasional  attendant  on  tetanus,  as  well  as 
several  other  diseases ; and  the  reason  why  it  is  less  frequently 
manifested  in  tetanus  than  in  the  present  disease,  appears  to  be 
this  : — that  in  tetanus  the  thirst  is  more  moderate.  Liquids  are 
less  dreaded  because  they  are  less  desired,  as  in  hydrophobia  the 
more  passionately  they  are  desired  the  more  intensely  they  are 
dreaded. 


26 


tion  of  the  muscles  of  the  chest,” — the  muscles  of 
respiration.  These  muscles,  and  those  of  the  larynx, 
though  not  antagonists  in  a state  of  health,  yet,  un- 
der the  peculiar  circumstances  of  the  disease,  vir- 
tually assume  the  relation  of  antagonism.  The 
constriction  of  the  larynx  prevents  the  free  access  of 
air  to  the  lungs,  and  thereby  opposes  the  contraction 
of  the  thoracic  muscles,  in  their  efforts  to  dilate  the 
chest.  They  are  thus  forced  to  contact,  with  an 
increasing  degree  of  energy,  as  respiration  becomes 
more  obstructed  by  the  affection  of  the  throat ; and, 
though  they  had  been  free  of  spasm  at  the  accession 
of  the  water- dread,  the  occurrence  of  this  latter  affec- 
tion would  have  been  sufficient  to  excite  the  former. 

If  the  affection  of  the  chest,  however,  be  an  essential 
symptom,  its  origin  cannot  be  ascribed  to  the  constric- 
tion of  the  larynx,  since  this  is  only  an  accidental 
accompaniment  of  the  disease.  The  water-dread, 
however,  when  it  occurs,  will  always  tend  to  exaspe- 
rate the  other. 

But  even  the  origin  of  the  “spasmodic  stricture 
of  the  muscles  of  the  chest”  may,  in  certain  circum- 
stances, be  in  some  measure  accounted  for.  For, 
being  muscles  of  respiration,  they  behove  to  be  in 
constant  action  ; and  sighing,  which  requires  of  them 
a preternatural  effort,  is  a frequent  premonitory 
symptom.  Now,  according  to  the  law  of  spasm, 
already  adverted  to,  we  should  naturally  expect  that 
the  accumulated  irritability  of  the  system  would  be 
ready  to  burst  out  in  regular  spasmodic  action  upon 
muscles  so  situated  There  is  not,  in  the  whole  com^ 
pass  of  the  body,  a single  class  of  muscles  which  pre- 
sents so  inviting  a theatre  for  its  early  and  regular 

ft 


27 


operation.  But,  in  whatever  way  we  may  account 
for  its  origin,  the  accession  of  water-dread  will  always 
be  a source  of  aggravation. 

But  there  are  other  symptoms  which  the  obstructed 
respiration  attendant  on  the  water-dread  tends  directly 
to  aggravate. 

Inflammation  of  the  brain  and  lungs  is  frequently 
detected  in  post-mortem  examinations,  and  every  per- 
son must  perceive  the  pernicious  influence  exerted  on 
these  organs  by  the  reiterated  obstruction  of  respira- 
tion. This,  even  in  inflammation  from  ordinary 
causes,  would  be  sufficient  to  urge  on  the  disease  to 
a fatal  termination,  despite  of  the  most  active  medical 
treatment. 

# 

From  the  frequent  liquidity  of  the  blood,  and  from 
passages  in  two  authors,  to  which  we  have  only  room 
to  refer,  it  would  appear  that  death  is  often  occasioned 
directly  by  the  sudden  suspension  of  respiration.*  Is 
respiration  suspended  by  the  “ spasmodic  constriction 
of  the  muscles  of  the  chest,”  or  by  constriction  of 
the  larynx,  or  by  both  ? The  water-dread,  when  it 
has  occurred,  has  at  all  events  hastened  the  fatal 
result. 

Emphysema  of  the  lungs,  or  neighbouring  parts, 
is  another  afflictive  consequence  of  the  affection  of 
the  throat. 

The  direct  tendency  of  the  convulsive  paroxysms, 
too,  abstracted  from  every  other  consideration,  is  to 
exhaust  the  strength  of  the  patient,  both  by  the 
fatigue  and  the  pain  which  they  directly  occasion. 

Though  water-dread  be  not  an  invariable,  it  is 

* On  this  subject,  sec  Bcerhaave,  Aphorism  1138,  and  Cooper’s 
Surgical  Dictionary,  p.  701,  5th  cd. 


28 


almost  a never-failing  symptom,  and,  when  present, 
must  be  a powerful  auxiliary  to  the  original  disease. 

Convulsions  and  death  by  any  of  the  terminations 
specified  might,  perhaps,  take  place  from  other  causes, 
although  the  auxiliary  were,  in  every  instance,  de- 
tached.* This  is,  indeed,  probable  enough.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  it  may  reasonably  be  inferred  that, 
to  all  these  modes  of  death,  and  these  untoward  symp- 
toms, it,  at  least,  liberally  contributes. 

Nay,  we  may,  I think,  safely  proceed  a step  farther, 
and,  without  inquiring  whether  the  disease  originates 
from  a specific  poison,  or  be  only  the  result  of  simple 
irritation — whatever  the  cause  may  be — allowing  that 
cause  to  have  worked  up  the  system  to  that  pitch  of 
morbid  irritability  in  which  it  usually  is  when  water- 
dread  is  first  manifested,  and  then  to  have  ceased  its 
operations — that  a salutary  crisis  had  just  taken 
place — and  that  from  this  period  respiration  had  been 
only  artificially  interrupted  to  that  degree,  and  with 
that  increasing  frequency  which  it  usually  is  by  the 
spontaneous  occurrence  of  the  water-dread,  I may 
safely  hazard  the  assertion,  that  this  system  of  artifi- 
cial interruption,  had  it  taken  up  the  disease  at  this 
period  of  advancement,  would,  in  most  cases,  have 
conducted  it  to  a fatal  issue,  by  one  or  other  of  the  ter- 
minations already  specified. 

But,  notwithstanding  of  this  formidable  combina- 
tion, there  have  been,  it  would  appear,  instances  of 
recovery.  How  natural  the  inference,  then,— how 
irresistible  the  conclusion, — that  if  in  every  instance 
the  auxiliary  had  been  timeously  detached  from  the 

* 


Vide  Mayo’s  Physiology,  2d  ed.,  p.  428. 


29 


I 


original  disease,  the  recoveries  would  have  been  more 
numerous. 

If  a cure  for  so  horrible  a malady  is  ever  to  be  dis- 
covered, there  is  a rational  ground  for  hope  that  the 
operation  of  bronchotomy  will  at  least  make  one  step 
of  approximation  towards  it  ; and  it  will,  at  all  events, 
afford  the  disease  ample  opportunity  of  fully  deve- 
loping itself,  in  its  undisguised  essential  character, 
and  place  the  patient  in  circumstances  more  favour- 
able for  the  salutary  operation  of  medicine.* 

It  is  thus,  as  in  mathematical  reasoning,  that  a 
grand  object,  in  physical  science,  is  generally  attain- 
ed,—by  successive  steps,  rather  than  by  a sudden  leap 
to  the  conclusion.  It  is  thus  that  an  enemy  is  gene- 
rally overcome, — a series  of  successful  attacks  in  the 
field  preparing  the  way  for  the  siege  and  occupation 
of  the  Capital. 

* To  those  who  are  satisfied  as  to  the  contagious  nature  of  the 
disease,  the  operation  will  afford  the  means  of  solving  some  im- 
portant questions,  viz.  : — Whether  the  poison  reside  in  the  saliva, 
or  in  the  frothy  mucus  voided  from  the  air-passages,  or  in  both  ? 
and,  consequently,  whether  mercury,  by  inducing  salivation,  has- 
ten the  elimination  of  the  virus  ? and,  by  this  property,  be  entitled 
to  any  confidence,  as  a therapeutic  agent  ? 


STATEMENT  BY  ANDREW  BUCHANAN,  M.D.,  PROFESSOR  OF  THE 
INSTITUTES  OF  MEDICINE  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  GLASGOW,  &c. 

Glasgow,  13  Moore  Place, 
25th  August,  1852. 

Dr  Dalzlel  Raving  put  into  my  Rands  two  manuscripts,  I Rave, 
at  Ris  request,  examined  them,  and  Rcreby  certify,  tliat  I recog- 
nise tlie  one  as  tlie  same  wRicR  I perused  in  tRe  year  1830,  wRen 
it  was  sent  to  me  for  publication  in  tRe  Glasgow  Medical  Journal, 
and  of  wRicR  a brief  abstract  appeared  in  tRat  work,  bearing  date 
28tR  August,  1830  ; and  tRat  tlie  otlier  manuscript  is  a transcript 
of  tlie  one  just  mentioned,  witli  only  a few  alterations,  cRiefly 
verbal,  and  not  affecting  tRe  subject  matter. 

ANDREW  BUCHANAN. 


The  M.S.  from'wliicli  this  publication  is  printed  is  tlie  one  re- 
ferred to  by  Dr  Buclianan  as  “a  transcript,  Ac.”  It  bears  upon 
it  the  evidence  of  his  Rand-writing. 

(Signed)  WILLIAM  GILCHRIST,  Printer. 


31 


EXTRACT  FROM  THE  GLASGOW  MEDICAL  JOURNAL,  NOT.,  1830. 


“Remarks  ox  Hysteria,  is  connexion  with  Hydrophobia,  and 
other  Convulsive  Affections.  By  John  Dalzikl,  M.D. 


“It  was  from  observing  the  phenomena  which  present  themselves 
n cases  of  hysteria  that  I was  first  led  to  take  the  general  views 
I am  about  to  explain  of  the  nature  of  nervous  diseases.  I was 
particularly  struck  with  a case  which  occurred  to  me  about  the 
beginning  of  June,  1829.  The  patient — a country  woman,  about 
So  or  40  years  of  age,  of  Herculean  strength  and  robust  consti- 
tution— had  a hysterical  paroxysm  of  dreadful  severity.  It  lasted 
from  a quarter  of  an  hour  to  twenty  minutes,  and  agitated  in  suc- 
cession the  various  groups  of  muscles  by  which  the  different  volun- 
tary movements  of  the  body  are  effected.  During  the  paroxysm, 
there  were  evident  symptoms  of  determination  of  blood  to  the 
head,  heaving  of  the  shoulders,  and  a loud  wheezing  noise  attend- 
ant on  respiration.  There  were,  however,  momentary  intervals 
of  comparative  quiescence,  while  the  morbid  action  was  shifting 
from  one  group  of  muscles  to  another,  the  wheezing  and  heaving 
of  the  shoulders  suffering  a very  considerable  abatement,  almost 
to  extinction  ; and,  during  these  intervals,  the  patient  was  able, 
faintly,  to  articulate  a syllable  or  two,  as  if  the  paroxysm  had 
completely  expended  its  force.  The  recurrence  of  the  wheezing, 
however,  with  the  consequent  heaving  of  the  shoulders,  was 
uniformly  a fresh  signal  of  attack  in  some  other  quarter,  till  the 
convulsive  agitation  had  run  nearly  the  whole  round  of  the  mus- 
cular system.  The  wheezing,  moreover,  appeared  to  my  ear  to 
proceed  solely  from  the  larynx. 

“Instead  of  endeavouring  to  explain  the  inductive  process  by 
which,  in  reflecting  on  the  preceding  and  other  similar  cases,  I 
was  led  to  adopt  the  following  opinions,  it  will  be  better,  as  ap- 
pears to  me,  both  for  the  sake  of  brevity  and  perspicuity,  to 
explain  them  in  a synthetical  way.  They  may  be  comprised  in 
the  three  following  propositions  : — 

“ 1st — That  the  globus  hystericus,  as  well  as  the  similar  affec 
tion  of  the  throat  in  hydrophobia,  depend  on  a spasmodic  stric- 


32 


ture  of  the  muscles  of  the  pharynx,  and  neighbouring  muscles, 
whereby  respiration  is  obstructed.  2d — That  obstructed  respira- 
tion occasions  cerebral  congestion,  as  well  as  a feeling  of  general 
uneasiness,  which  may  be  considered  as  identical  with  the  feeling 
of  suffocation,  and  which  is  an  attendant  on  the  paroxysmal 
exacerbations  of  each  of  the  diseases  under  consideration.  3d — 
That  cerebral  congestion,  and  general  uneasiness,  separately  or 
conjointly,  may,  in  an  irritable  habit,  occasion  convulsion.” 

Thus  far  Dr  Dalziel.  We  regret  exceedingly  that  in  a work  of 
this  kind,  devoted  chiefly  to  practical  subjects,  we  cannot  follow 
Dr  Dalziel  in  the  full  development  of  his  theory  of  nervous  diseases. 
He  first  considers  the  three  preceding  propositions,  as  independent 
of  each  other,  and,  as  appears  to  us,  succeeds  in  establishing  them, 
bringing  to  the  inquiry  much  acute  reasoning  and  physiological 
knowledge.  He  next  considers  their  relation  to  each  other,  and, 
concluding  that  they  are  linked  together  as  cause  and  effect,  he 
deduces  from  that  connexion  an  explication  of  the  origin  of  the 
convulsive  movements  of  the  voluntary  muscles,  and  other  symp- 
toms of  the  nervous  paroxysm.  We  subjoin  the  practical  sugges- 
tion, with  respect  to  the  treatment  of  hydrophobia,  which  he 
deduces  from  his  theoretical  views,  and  can  only  add,  that  we 
shall  have  much  pleasure  in  receiving  communications,  of  a more 
practical  kind,  from  so  intelligent  a correspondent. 

“ As  a palliative  measure  in  the  treatment  of  hydrophobia,  the 
operation  of  Bronchotomy  might  be  expected  to  ward  off,  or.  at 
least  abate  the  violence  of  the  convulsive  paroxysm  ; and  there 
are  other  consequences  equally,  or  still  more  injurious,  which  this 
measure  would  tend  directly  to  obviate.  From  the  operation 
having  failed  to  alleviate  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  in  dogs,  it 
has  been  rashly  inferred  that  it  would  be  inefficient  when  performed 
upon  man.  But  rabies  canina,  as  it  affects  the  dog,  and  hydro- 
phobia, as  it  affects  the  human  subject,  are  very  different  diseases  ; 
and  it  appears  to  me,  that  there  is  sufficient  evidence  to  justify 
the  expectation,  that  the  operation  of  bronchotomy  would  at  least 
be  a most  important  step  towards  effecting  a cure. 

“ ITolm  or  Drumlanrig, 

Aug.  28,  1830.”