Brigitte Papenfuss & Ralf Mooren 
SOL Hypnosis® 


When the 


JU] efero) ah-yed (oleh 
aaliare 


speaks 


How the energy of the soul directs reality 


BOSON 


BOSON 


Brigitte Papenfuss & Ralf Mooren 


WHEN THE SUBCON- 
SCIOUS MIND SPEAKS 


How the energy of the soul directs reality 


A non-fiction book about changing reality as a Roman 


after a true event 


Bibliographic information: 

The German National Library lists this publication in the 
German National Bibliography. Detailed bibliographic data are 
available on the Internet at www.dnb.de. 


© BOSON Verlag, Monchengladbach 2013 
www.boson-verlag.de 


All rights reserved 
2nd Edition 2014 


ISBN 978-3-944878-00-3 


Cover design: Alexander Ziegler, BA Graphic Design 
Editorial office: Sabine Kloske, Marburg 

Printing and binding: FINIDR, s.r.o. CZ 

Translation to English: Stephan Beck, sbcompetence.com 


The work may only be reproduced - even in part - with the express 
permission of the publisher. 


Table of contents 


Acknowledgement ..........:cccccesssccssecssecssecsecceeeceeeeeeeees 10 
FORE WOE coicsietinte nate ssBiashincbeia cdot lSeats acuss eet a teatenotsen 12 
This novel could change your life ............cccccceeees 12 
dito bal Mee eae eR POOPED RCP Dea PE Nam ESPERO ORTON PSR TROT EPRTS 15 
The subconscious 1n dialogue.........ccccccccccccsseeseeeeeeees 15 
The involuntary Way ........cccccccsccsssccseccsecceecceeceeeeeeeees 16 
Arriving in the cave of the lion ............eeeeesseceeeeeeeeees 19 
Show hypnosis vs. therapeutic hypnosis............... 21 
The escape route 18 OPeN ......ccceecccesseesecceeceeeeeeeeeeeees 25 
Do you really Want t0?......cccccccccccccccecceccceeceeeeeeeees 26 
The hypnotic trance.........ccccccccscccseccssccsecceeceeeeeeeeeeeees 28 
Unconscious programs and suggestions.............0006 30 
Communication with the subconscious mind ......... 40 
SOL Hypnosis and medicine...............ccccseeeseeeseeereens 45 
The registration fOrm ..........cccccccccccsseeescceeceeeceeeeeeeees 49 


The preliminary talk ...........ccccccccceccseecseceeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 50 


The positive POSOULCE .........cceccecceseeestcceeceeeceeeeeseeeeeees 62 


Preparation Of HyPNosis ..........ccccccccccccseccecceecceeceeeeees 63 
Introduction by eye fixatiOn............cceeescscceeeeeeeeeneees 69 
The report Structure........ccccccccccccssccseccscceeceeeeeeeeeeeees 71 
§ DY 21~) 612) 01 8 0 73 
DWE TRACHOMA GION yx,5 ssc: Jenks ctutsenceeseeca rsa iaanedeadsaenncne ta 76 
Regression and return.........ccccccccscccssccsecceeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 78 
The triggering Situations. iicic:0c.sdiceseiecescsiedcacetieades 80 
Develop and anchor new convictions..............0000 93 
The hypnosis CXit........ccccccccccseccscccscceseceseeeseesseeeseeess 109 
The follow-up GiSCUSSION ...........ccccccscccceseeeeeeeeeeeeeees 114 
Hpiloswe wccsci een cian wa leoNaeia liens 117 
PAYG seccataacta Meteeealarccatecnattntande een eoiateinie eats 122 
What is reality really? oc ccccceeeeeeeseeeeeeeees 122 
A cosy get-together ...........cccccssesseesseesseessessserssesneeees 124 
The trigger of Change .........cccccccccceccseccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 126 


The interim balance of life... eee cceeeeecceeeeeees 132 


Energy work - the intuitive reconnection ............. 138 


What do we actually consist Of? ........cccccceeeeeeeees 141 
It all comes and goes out of nothing................0006 146 
Matter or Energy? .......cccccccccccccccceecceecceeeeeeeseeeeeeeees 150 
Spirit Controls Matter .......ccccccccccesccecccescseeeeeceseeeees 155 
Spooky long-distance effect? ...........cccccccessceeeeeeeeees 160 
The unconscious diMeNsin .........eceeeeeeeeeneeeeneeeee 168 
Thewnconditional love.siicice castes aaa 173 
The question of the meaning of life... 182 
Death and the eternity of being............ccccceeeees 187 
When the soul leaves the body ............ccccccceeceeeeeees 196 
Where our identity comes from ...........ccccccececeeeeeees 197 
The psycho-energetic field ........ccccccceeceeceeeeeeeeeeees 200 
Daily life in the meritocracy ...........c:cccccceeeeeeeenteees 204 
Creating reality through manifestation................ 208 
The spiritual World... ccccccccceccceeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 216 


The secret of life ooo. ececccceesecccceescecceseececsseaeeess 219 


Literature list 0... cccccccccsccceecceeeceeeceseeeeeeeeeeeeeees 220 
Interesting Web LINKS ..........ccceccccecccsccceseesceeeeeeeeeees 221 


About the authors......cccccccececccccssececcesesscceeeeeceees 223 


Acknowledgement 


Our special thanks go to our client, Mr. Manfred 
Schneider*, without whose vehement urge to publish his 
hypnosis and thus the SOL method in detail, this book 
would never have been possible. 


Brigitte PapenfuB & Ralf Mooren 


* Note: (Name changed due to confidentiality and protection of per- 
sonal rights). 


10 


11 


Foreword 


This novel could change your life 


With his conscious attention, man can only see a 
small part of the infinite reality of which he is a part. 
Just as one sees only the tip of an iceberg rising out of 
the water, the essential is invisible to our conscious per- 
ception. 


But if we are in a deep, hypnotic trance, far greater 
realities open up to us via our unconscious - realities full 
of perspectives for our life. 


What is reality? What is really reality? And what if 
we could change reality? 


With this book we dive into the mysterious and fasci- 
nating world of deep trance - into the depth of the human 
being. And what do we encounter here? People who tell 
us in detail and highly emotio-nally about situations 
from past lives. Even more, people who report in highest 
feelings of happiness and tears of emotion about that 
state which we call "death" from our physical point of 
view. In this state of deep trance, these people feel an 
intimate connection with an unconditional love of which 
they are a part. The dimensions of space and time, as we 
perceive them with our awake consciousness and accept 
them as self-evident, are completely dissolved in this 
state of unconscious perception. In this state only the 


12 


pure, individual being exists in intimate and loving 
unity with everything that exists. 


A client who has reached this state of deep trance can, 
under the guidance of a hypnotherapist, cause his sub- 
conscious mind to change his whole life forever. (Note: 
We use the colloquial term "subconscious" to describe 
the unconscious, as we consider it more appropriate for 
our method). 


It is our deep, inner need to pass on our experiences, 
which we have made during our many years of working 
as hypnotherapists, to any individual reader who is in- 
terested. For this reason, we describe in the following an 
example of hypnosis which was carried out and recorded 
in our house exactly as it is presented. We hereby de- 
clare this in lieu of oath. In order to provide a compre- 
hensive insight into the problem and the emotional 
worlds of the client, but also those of the hypnotherapist, 
we have chosen the form of a novel. 


This describes in detail the course of a SOL hypnosis 
therapy from the reception of the client through the pre- 
liminary talk to the actual hypnosis at each point. In this 
respect, this book is addressed to all readers who would 
like to share our individual experiences and especially 
to hypnotherapists who would like to use the precisely 
described procedures of hypnosis to exchange experi- 
ences. 


The name of the person under hypnosis was changed of 
course. The names Doris and Manfred Schneider are 


13 


freely invented. Any resemblance to living persons is 
purely coincidental. 


What we experience day after day during the hypnosis 
we perform about the infinity of being and thus of the 
soul is deeply reassuring and full of perspectives for life. 
What happens here is absolutely fantastic, but it cannot 
be explained rationally. For this reason, we have set out 
to search for logical and scientifically comprehensible 
explanations for the phenomena we encounter again and 
again. Thus, we were able to offer our client Manfred 
Schneider the insights of physics, quantum physics, re- 
search into near-death experiences and psycho-ener- 
getic fields to answer the many questions he had after 
his hypnosis 


We hope that every reader of our "novel" will find what 
he or she has been quietly searching for a long time. 


14 


Part 1 


The subconscious in dialogue 


15 


The involuntary way 


The barges on the Rhine were barely visible. It was 
only a quarter past two on this gloomy November day, 
but everything was in the dull grey of the fine drizzle. 
Thoughtfully, Manfred Schneider turned into Cacilien- 
allee. The windscreen washers of his comfortable off- 
road vehicle silently wiped away the fine rain drops 
again and again and the blue instrument lighting 
bathed the interior in a bizarre light. But Manfred did 
not really notice all this. He was far too busy with his 
thoughts, which kept running through his head as if by 
magic. 


Manfred was a man of forty-eight years of age who 
could not be upset so easily. As a building physicist, he 
ran his own engineering company with twelve employ- 
ees. He lived together with his wife Doris in a luxurious 
penthouse flat in the heart of Diisseldorf. So, everything 
could have been perfect. But it was not. He felt anything 
but perfect. 


As he headed for the South Bridge, it flashed through 
his mind: "What are you doing here? You've been solving 
your own problems for forty-eight years, and now you're 
going to do it too! For a moment he had the impulse to 
leave behind the South Bridge and turn around. He had 
already put his indicator on, but then he gave himself a 
jolt and went straight on. 


16 


Manfred was on his way to a hypnotherapist in Moén- 
chengladbach. The appointment was scheduled for 15:00 
and the whole thing could take four to five hours. He did 
not know much more than that. Doris had made the ap- 
pointment for him. He felt this anger rising in him 
again. He pulled a face. There it was again, that inexpli- 
cable, stabbing pain in his right thigh. "Why did he have 
to come now?" When he left at the Neuss West junction 
towards Aachen, it had stopped raining. "At least some- 
thing," he growled. 


Again, the picture of Doris appeared, as she had 
thrown herself at him in anger and despair during her 
last argument a fortnight ago: "I am a free man and not 
your property! The day before, Doris had visited an old 
school friend whom she had met again by chance in the 
city. Actually, she wanted to get home at 6:00 pm at the 
latest, but then she only showed up again at 10:00 pm. 
Manfred loved Doris more than anything and at the 
same time was afraid he could lose her. And so, in the 
four hours he waited for Doris, he had thought the wild- 
est thoughts about what Doris and her boyfriend were 
up to. When she had finally come home, he had made the 
most absurd accusations against her, and once again 
there had been an argument. 


But this time it was serious, very serious. Manfred 
knew this point from his previous relationships, which 
all failed because of his pathological jealousy. And so, he 
had promised Doris to get help. To show her how serious 
he was, he had asked her to make an appointment for 


17 


him with a psychotherapist. And then, when he came 
home two days later in the evening, she had told him 
that she had made today's appointment with the hypno- 
therapist for him. The psychotherapists were probably 
all booked up for months and so she had made an ap- 
pointment with the hypnosis institute in Ménchenglad- 
bach on the advice of a friend. He had looked at her in 
horror and explained to her: "I am not going to any hyp- 
nosis-uncle! But when Doris then looked at him in hor- 
ror and he saw the sheer desperation in her eyes, he had 
given in and said: "Well, I can try it. And now he was off 
to his first hypnosis appointment. He was already feel- 
ing very queasy, because he was afraid that the hypno- 
tist might do something to him that was beyond his con- 
trol. 


When the navigation system took him through the 
winding village street of Wickrathberg, he became really 
restless. "The destination is on the left in front of you", 
it sounded from the navigation system and he could al- 
ready see the illuminated sign of the hypnosis institute. 


Manfred wanted to get out, but somehow that didn't 
work out. The pain in his right leg suddenly became un- 
bearable and he could hear his own heartbeat, at least 
he had the feeling. He took several deep breaths. Then 
he opened the door resolutely and got out. Somehow, he 
felt like a tiger before the jump when he pressed the bell 
button. 


18 


Arriving in the cave of the lion 


"Hello, Mister Schneider", a friendly female voice 
sounded from the intercom. "Please come in. I'm in the 
other building and will come right over." At the same 
time the door opener buzzed, and the antique entrance 
door popped open. Reluctantly Manfred entered and 
closed the door behind him. He found himself in the 
large, central entrance hall, which was brightly lit. All 
the walls were covered with a white clay plaster, which 
he, as a building physicist, recognized immediately. He 
stood on a floor made of bog oak and a high, modern 
wooden staircase led to the upper floor. Manfred was 
still looking around with interest when he heard that 
somewhere at the back of the building a door had been 
opened. Now he heard footsteps approaching quickly 
and through the door opposite the entrance a woman 
came towards him with a winning smile. "Brigitte Pa- 
penfuB", she introduced herself and reached out her 
hand to him. "Manfred Schneider", he said with some 
relief in his voice and gave her his hand. He looked 
down, because the woman, who was about his age, was 
a good two heads shorter than him. "Would you like to 
take your coat off?“ Manfred nodded and peeled off his 
furlined, dark brown leather jacket. 


The petite woman took off his jacket, hung it neatly 
on a coat hanger and stowed it in the wardrobe. 


19 


"If you will please follow me", she smiled at him and 
went ahead without waiting for his polite "yes, gladly". 
They walked along a long corridor that was at the back 
of the building. Through the windows Manfred could see 
a large, green courtyard, which was formed by other 
buildings on three sides. Although it was still very hazy, 
the whole thing seemed bathed in a strangely warm, yel- 
lowish light. Frau PapenfuS opened the last door and 
they entered a room which, contrary to his expectations, 
had nothing at all like a treatment room. The room was 
sparsely lit by elaborate floor lamps in the corners, but 
was completely adequately lit. Here stood a suite con- 
sisting of a cosy sofa and two comfortable leather arm- 
chairs grouped around a low glass table. On the table 
were various drinks, a bow] of sweets and two silver pots 
as well as two glasses and two cups. 


"Please take a seat - wherever you like", Ms PapenfuB 
asked him in a friendly manner and pointed to the seat- 
ing group with an inviting gesture. Manfred instinc- 
tively chose the comfortable leather armchair by the 
window. From here he had the best view of the entrance 
door. He looked around briefly and noticed that the 
whole room was in the same simple style he had already 
noticed in the entrance hall. Manfred was still very 
tense, but Mrs. PapenfuB didn't seem to notice anything 
of it. She sat down on the sofa, so that he sat on her left. 


"May I offer you a coffee or a tea? Or perhaps some 
thing cold?" "I'd love a coffee," replied Manfred. Mrs. Pa- 
penfu8B reached for one of the pots, poured in two cups of 


20 


steaming coffee and placed a cup on the table in front of 
him. "One more thing, then we can start right away." 
She got up, went to a cupboard and came back with a 
thick, white candle, which she placed on the table and 
lit. "I just find it more comfortable that way," she said. 
"Don't you?" Manfred nodded and took a sip of coffee. 
Mrs. Papenfu didn't seem to notice the slight trembling 
of his hand. 


Show hypnosis vs. therapeutic hypnosis 


21 


"Tt's nice that you have come to us, Mr Schneider", the 
hypnotherapist opened the conversation. "Do you al- 
ready have an idea of what hypnosis is and what you can 
achieve with it? Manfred looked up in surprise. Actually 
he had only come here to convince Doris of his honest 
efforts. 


Of course, he had been looking for a long time for a 
feasible way to defeat his recurring jealousy. Every time 
the jealousy rose in him, his thoughts began to rise - and 
then it was too late. As soon as he saw his partner, he 
made a terrible scene. And a relationship can't take that, 
at least not over and over again, and certainly not in 
ever shorter intervals. He had experienced this many 
time before - again and again. And with Doris it was al- 
most time again. Yes, he wished for nothing more than 
to be able to let go of the jealousy that was always over- 
powering him. 


But to let himself be turned around in hypnosis for 
this, he had a deep, inner aversion to it, even if Doris 
still had so much hope in hypnosis. He answered 
thoughtfully: 


"To be honest, I have seen some show hypnosis on tel- 
evision. I could never understand that grown-up people 
here let themselves be turned into monkeys by a hypno- 
tist in front of an astonished audience. To be honest, I 
always thought these hypnoses were a ruse. Once, how- 
ever, I saw a young woman on a television show who was 


22 


completely stiffened up in hypnosis, from head to toe. 
Two helpers had then placed her on two chairs, one un- 
der her head and one under her feet. The woman was as 
stiff as a board and even when another woman sat down 
on her stomach, she did not drop a millimeter. Then she 
was put back on her feet by the two helpers. The hypno- 
tist blew into her face and she was immediately fully mo- 
bile again. How the trick worked, I still don't know to- 
day. Manfred had almost talked himself into a rage. 


"That was no trick," explained the hypnotherapist. 
"This is what hypnosis calls a 'cataleptic bridge’. It is 
quite easy to completely stiffen the muscles of an arm, 
for example, using hypnosis. At that moment the person 
concerned can no longer move his arm. And the more he 
tries, the stiffer the arm becomes. In hypnosis this is 
generally called "catalepsy". In a cataleptic bridge, the 
entire body is then stiffened during show hypnosis. This 
stiffening itself is completely harmless. But the fact that 
this stiffened body is then placed on two chairs in a com- 
pletely self-supporting manner, with the additional 
weight of another person on top of it, is highly irrespon- 
sible. No one can rule out the possibility of late physical 
consequences. However, the show effect associated with 
this is so impressive that an irresponsible show hypno- 
tist would vehemently deny all risks involved. This 
"blowing in the face" what you have seen may underline 
the show effect, i.e. the demonstration of the power of 
the hypnotist, but for me this is simply extremely unhy- 
gienic. 


23 


Here I do not want to say anything against show hyp- 
nosis as such. After all, it is always based on an agree- 
ment between the hypnotized person and the hypnotist, 
whereby the possibilities of hypnosis are impressively 
presented. Only a really good show hypnotist excludes 
any danger of late effects from the beginning. He also 
does not suggest to the people he hypnotizes to do any- 
thing they should be ashamed of after the hypnosis. And 
above all, he doesn't even dream of demonstrating a cat- 
aleptic bridge, which he could do with ease," she added. 


Manfred had listened with interest. He could hardly 
believe that the show hypnosis he had just told us about 
had been performed without any hidden trick. Very 
slowly it dawned on him that hypnosis could be a very 
effective method to bring about change. 


"Do you also perform show hypnosis?" he asked lurk- 
ing. "No", she replied smiling, "we don't perform show 
hypnosis, not even among friends and", she added, "we 
couldn't do that either. My colleague and I only perform 
therapeutic hypnosis. Hypnosis can be used for one or 
the other, but it depends on the inner attitude of the 
hypnotist. 


A show hypnotist wants to entertain his audience 
well and show his skills as a hypnotist. The person he is 
hypnotizing serves him as a means to an end. 


People come to us who have deep personal problems. 
For them a hypnosis treatment is often the last atempt, 
after they have usually gone through years of therapy. 


24 


In hypnosis therapy, therefore, the human being is at 
the centre and hypnosis is a means to an end. That is 
the difference." 


The escape route is open 


25 


"If you agree", she continued, "then first of all I will 
explain to you something about the effects of hypnosis 
and how a hypnosis treatment works. Then I will give 
you a registration form, that is, a form that contains 
some important questions about your problem. Please 
take all the time you need to fill in the form completely. 
Afterwards we will discuss your details in peace and 
quiet and then, when everything has been discussed and 
you have no more questions, I will ask you if you really 
want to be hypnotized. And if not, we may have a cup of 
coffee in peace and quiet. What I mean to say is that at 
any given moment you decide for yourself whether you 
want to stop or continue. Do you agree with that?" 


Manfred suddenly fell a stone from his heart. He no 
longer felt like the victim who was supposed to endure 
something without being able to control it. He would 
have the opportunity to learn something about hypnosis. 
If he wanted, he would be able to talk about his problems 
that deeply moved him. And best of all, he would be able 
to go at any time when he felt uncomfortable. Gratefully 
he answered: "Yes, with pleasure." 


Do you really want to? 


26 


"Fine," said the hypnotherapist happily, "then we can 
start. But before that another question: "Your wife made 
today's appointment for you. Are you here now because 
you really want to or just to do your wife a favour? 
Manfred felt caught. For a moment he wondered 
whether he should lie or tell the truth. Intuitively he de- 
cided for the truth: "I have", he murmured quietly "a 
huge problem with my jealousy, which I sometimes can't 
control. In order to show Doris my good will after our 
last argument, I had asked her to make an appointment 
for me in a practice where I could get professional help. 
And instead, please don't take it personally, I ended up 
in a hypnosis practice. Manfred breathes audibly. He 
was glad that it was out. 


Mrs. Papenfu8B laughed happily. "Thank you for your 
openness. It makes things much easier. And now please 
allow me to be open to you as well. A hypnosis treatment 
will only work if you consciously decide to do it with your 
own free will. I think, by the way, this also applies to any 
other form of treatment. So, if you have only come here 
to do your wife a favour, then we should end it now. How- 
ever, if you are basically willing to solve your problem by 
hypnosis, then we can continue now. Please decide now! 
The hypnosis therapist looked at Manfred in a friendly 
and at the same time expectant manner. 


Manfred swallowed. He felt that he had to make his 
basic decision for or against hypnosis here and now. As 
friendly and nice as Frau PapenfuB might be, somehow 
the aunt was tough. He had suddenly given up the latent 


27 


hope of being able to play something for her. All of a sud- 
den, this stabbing pain in his right thigh hit him again. 
He pulled his face for a moment and stroked his leg 
away. He suddenly realized that he had the chance to 
walk, but also that he would take his problem with him 
again. He had always done this unconsciously until now, 
but now he was suddenly aware of it. "To go" had the 
same meaning for him at that moment as "to flee" - to 
flee from himself. An immense, inner power rose in him. 
A power he had never noticed before and yet it was so 
familiar to him. No, he would not flee - not this time. 
Determined, he looked at Frau Papenfuf: "I am ready!“ 


The hypnotic trance 


"Good," she said. "I'm very pleased. Then I will first 
tell you something about hypnotherapy: When you de- 
cide to go for a hypnotic treatment afterwards, you agree 


28 


to enter a state of hypnotic trance. In this state you will 
experience increased attention. You will perceive much 
more than you can imagine in your present, conscious 
state. But you will not care about all this. You will pos- 
sibly be flooded with very touching emotions, very in- 
tense feelings. But from your present, conscious point of 
view you will not care about that either. In other words: 
In the state of such a hypnotic trance you are in your 
deepest innermost being - in the realm of your most in- 
tense feelings. Memories and experiences will arise in 
you that would never be accessible to you in the con- 
scious state - a deep, inner knowledge. You will feel, 
know and perceive all this intensely and yet you will not 
care about it at all. You will not care because you do not 
judge in this state. And this is because your conscious- 
ness, from which your ego-feeling comes, is watching the 
whole thing apathetically. A hypnotic trance is therefore 
a state of increased attention with completely limited 
critical faculties - comparable to an intense dream in 
terms of feeling. The only difference is that in this dream 
someone talks to you and asks you questions. You an- 
swer and tell them what you see and what you feel. But 
you don't care about that either. The words come natu- 
rally. And sometimes you will wonder who is actually 
speaking. But that doesn't really interest you. You just 
notice it, but basically you don't care at all.“ 


29 


Unconscious programs and suggestions 


Mrs.. PapenfuB leaned back comfortably. "In this 
state you are highly suggestible. Everything that is sug- 
gested to you in this state goes directly into your subcon- 
scious, unfiltered, and there it becomes a firm, lasting 


30 


conviction. A conviction that could also be called a "fixed 
rule" or an "unconscious program", 


Manfred swallowed. "Does that mean that you can re- 
program a person through hypnosis like a computer? 
And that this new program, this new, unconscious rule, 
will remain after the end of hypnosis? "Exactly that is 
what it means", answered Mrs. PapenfuB seriously. 


"I'll give you a banal example: Imagine a hypnotist 
would suggest to someone in a state of hypnotic trance 
that any form of coffee he drinks from now on tastes like 
saltwater. This person would try to drink coffee a few 
more times after the hypnosis. But every time he would 
take the first sip, he would make a face because he only 
tastes pure saltwater. If he had tried it three times, he 
would probably not touch a coffee fairy again - for the 
rest of his life. And if the hypnotist then suggested that 
the person would have forgotten everything that hap- 
pened during the hypnosis at the end of it, he would not 
even know why. Of course, no serious hypnotist in the 
world would do this, but it would be possible without fur- 
ther ado.“ 


Manfred looked at the hypnotherapist in disbelief. "I 
can't imagine that something like this is possible. After 
all, I know what coffee tastes like. And if I brew a coffee 
fairy fresh with clear water, it can't taste of salt. That 
makes sense, doesn't it? "Right, that's absolutely logi- 
cal," the hypnosis therapist agreed with him. "Come on, 
let's go through the whole thing again logically: When 


31 


did you first drink coffee in your life? Manfred looks at 
her in surprise. He ponders. "Maybe when I was seven 
or eight, I don't remember exactly." Mrs. Papenfub 
smiled. "So it's been a very long time, maybe thirty or 
forty years. From the first time you drank coffee, you 
had the personal experience of how coffee tastes. So, you 
have formed an unconscious program for the taste of cof- 
fee. And in the course of time many other programs have 
been added, such as coffee with milk, with sugar, with 
sugar and milk, or cappuccino. Today you probably have 
several thousand unconscious programs for the taste of 
coffee - one for each variation. And of these many thou- 
sands of programs, you have a few that you call up par- 
ticularly frequently. These are exactly the programs for 
the types of coffee preparation that you particularly like 
- for example, coffee with milk and a piece of sugar or 
espresso with two pieces of sugar. And when you order a 
coffee today, you order it exactly according to your sub- 
conscious idea of how this coffee tastes best. And when 
you have had your first sip, you don't have to relearn 
what coffee tastes like. Rather, something completely 
different happens in a flash: with the first sip, you per- 
ceive taste stimuli that immediately trigger the uncon- 
scious program that matches this preparation. And this 
program is immediately compared with your favorite 
coffee-flavored program, without you consciously think- 
ing about it. If the deviation in taste from your subcon- 
scious perception is small, then you drink your coffee 
with pleasure. If the difference in taste is greater, you 
may add some milk or sugar. 


32 


If you look at the whole thing from a distance, there 
is a lightning-fast interplay of thawing unconscious pro- 
grams that you do not consciously think about for a sec- 
ond. Your body lacks sugar or caffeine and you feel like 
having a cup of coffee. Or you can sit down at a table in 
a convivial group. Then you are in a situation in which 
the unconscious program "Drinking coffee" is perhaps 
triggered. So when you take a sip of coffee, a number of 
unconscious programs have already been triggered. 
These programs have triggered sensations in you which 
have ultimately led to actions. And during the whole 
time you have not even consciously thought about it. 
Just as you have unconscious taste programs for coffee, 
you also have them for salt and water. And now the hyp- 
notist comes along and suggests to you that every form 
of coffee tastes like salt water from now on. What do you 
think happens there?" 


"The taste program for coffee will be exchanged for 
the taste program for salt," Manfred answered question- 
ingly. "Exactly," agreed Mrs. PapenfuB. "The taste pro- 
gram for coffee is not gone, but it is simply no longer 
triggered after such a suggestion. Instead, the taste pro- 
gram for salt is triggered. So the coffee tastes like salt- 
water.“ 


"But", Manfred continued, "if that's the case, then I 
can relearn the taste of coffee and create new taste pro- 
grams". "That's exactly right," smiled Mrs. PapenfuB, 
"but it doesn't really work. There is now a little catch, 
which prevents you from relearning the taste of coffee: 


33 


You already have an unconscious taste program for cof- 
fee, and now it's salt. And the moment you want to learn 
something new, as in our example the taste of coffee, the 
first taste stimulus automatically asks whether an un- 
conscious program for this stimulus already exists or 
whether something new has to be learned, 1.e. a new pro- 
gram has to be created. But if a program is already pre- 
sent, as in our case the one for salt, then it is automati- 
cally triggered, and the taste stimulus is ignored. So, for 
the person concerned, what everyone else drinks with 
pleasure as coffee tastes like saltwater. You don't have 
the slightest chance of consciously changing an uncon- 
scious program once it has been set up, no matter how 
much you would like to. This is simply because your sub- 
conscious works a million times faster than your con- 
scious mind.“ 


Manfred's bias gradually began to wane. He had 
never thought about how much his life might be influ- 
enced by unconscious programs. On the contrary, he had 
always been convinced that he was going through life 
fully consciously as a rational person. And now he began 
to suspect that the quality of his life might be highly de- 
pendent on his own unconscious programs. Maybe hyp- 
nosis would be just the right thing for him to solve his 
oppressive problems or at least reduce them. He listened 
with great interest as Mrs. PapenfuB continued with her 
explanations: 


"The subconscious with its many billions of programs 
is, however, very practical for us humans. It serves to 


34 


make us humans much more efficient. You can imagine 
the subconscious as a huge database of rules and pro- 
grams. There are unconscious programs for almost all 
situations in our lives, which are automatically trig- 
gered in a certain situation. 


You just drove here by car. While driving, did you con- 
sciously think about whether you should move the steer- 
ing wheel to the right or left, or did you perhaps make 
conscious decisions to use the accelerator or brake pe- 
dal? Please tell me how you experienced your car journey 
here.“ 


Manfred pondered. It took a little while until he an- 
swered. "To be honest, I didn't really concentrate on the 
driving itself. Driving actually went by itself, I didn't 
even think about it. I was rather busy with my thoughts 
and problems and with the question of what to expect 
from you now. "You see", explained Mrs. Papenful. 
"Your unconscious programs were at work throughout 
the whole trip. This gave you the opportunity to think 
about everything that had nothing to do with the actual 
activity of driving a car. If this had been your first driv- 
ing lesson today, you would have thought of nothing else 
but steering, braking and accelerating. Today, as an ex- 
perienced driver, you have so many unconscious pro- 
grams on the subject of driving that driving seems to 
happen all by itself. The same applies, of course, to all 
other areas of life such as cycling, skiing or even speak- 
ing. We are able to have a fluent conversation over a cup 


35 


of coffee here without having to formulate a single sen- 
tence laboriously and consciously. “ 


Mrs. PapenfuB took the coffee pot and looked at 
Manfred briefly and questioningly. He nodded. "Thank 
you, gladly" and held his cup out to her. The hypnosis- 
rapeutin poured coffee. When Manfred brought the cup 
to his mouth, he visibly perceived the taste of the coffee. 
Mrs. PapenfuB grinned mischievously. "Still tastes like 
coffee, doesn't it?" He felt caught and grinned back af- 
firmatively - but it was a thoughtful grin. 


"But the subconscious influences our life to an even 
greater extent," continued Ms Papenfu8. "It controls 
every single cell of our body and thus all bodily func- 
tions. The unconscious programs created here decide on 
health or illness, aversion or affection towards another 
person or even towards life itself. 


The subconscious does not evaluate. It only reacts to 
every kind of stimulus by activating the corresponding 
programs triggered by these stimuli at lightning speed, 
almost without any time delay. In doing so, it does not 
care whether its unconscious reactions are good or bad 
for us. It cannot make any decisions at all, because it 
only manages experiences that have become uncon- 
scious programs. It only allows new experiences if there 
are no programs for them yet. Unconscious programs 
can be very useful and make our lives easier, for exam- 
ple when we are driving a car. 


36 


It becomes problematic, however, if someone has un- 
favourable unconscious programs. These can then re- 
duce the quality of life extremely. Let me give you an- 
other example: Imagine a little boy, say three years old, 
sitting in front of his plate and absolutely refusing to eat 
anything, say fish. His mother sits next to him, shoves a 
piece in his mouth and forces him to swallow it. At this 
moment the child feels disgust and already has the un- 
conscious program: Fish is disgusting, you can't eat it. 


Years later the boy is a grown man. The triggering 
event has long been repressed and completely forgotten. 
And the man wonders why he has had such a disgust for 
fish throughout his life that he has never once been able 
to overcome the urge to try a piece. And this despite the 
fact that it always looked appetising when his neigh- 
bours ate fish.“ 


Manfred had listened carefully. He had become even 
more thoughtful. Silently he wondered if there could be 
a program in his subconscious that triggered his inexpli- 
cable, recurring fits of jealousy. And if so, whether this 
could be changed ... 


"Could the man who was forced to eat fish as a child 
have his aversion to fish removed by hypnosis?" he asked 
hopefully. "If I understood you correctly, all you would 
have to do is put him in a hypnotic trance and suggest 
that fish is the most delicious food in the world. 


The hypnotherapist looked at him in horror. "I would 
never give such an effective suggestion, that's what they 


37 


call it. The fatal thing about effect suggestions is that 
they have to be formulated very carefully and that you 
have to be aware on all sides that they contain exactly 
what the client wants to achieve. The subconscious takes 
every suggestion literally. It does not interpret. It does 
not ask itself what the hypnotist might have meant by 
this suggestion. It mercilessly accepts it exactly as it was 
given.“ 


"But you've been talking about such suggestions all 
along." Manfred seemed a little irritated and his nascent 
hope began to wane. "I have explained to you the effects 
of the subconscious by means of examples", the hypno- 
therapist smiled. 


"Let's just think together what would actually be 
achieved with such an effective suggestion. What do you 
think?" Manfred thought for a moment and looked at 
Mrs. PapenfuB without understanding. "Well, the man 
would like to eat fish." "That's right", she replied. "The 
man would like to eat fish. Fish would be the most deli- 
cious food in the world for him." Manfred looked at her 
without understanding. "That's what I say. And that 
would solve the man's problem." 


"I'm not quite so convinced of that," Mrs. Papenfui 
gurgled with pleasure. "Imagine the man sitting with 
friends in a restaurant and, after having had fish soup 
as his starter and trout for the main course, now orders 
a shrimp cocktail for dessert while the others sit in front 
of their sundaes. But he doesn't even get a chance to 


38 


touch his dessert, because he already suffers an allergic 
shock when he touches the trout and is driven to the 
nearest hospital under flashing blue lights, in grave 
danger of his life. The aversion to fish had protected him 
from his fish allergy. Whether this really solves the 
man's problem, I dare to doubt", grinned the hypnother- 
apist. 


While Mrs. PapenfuB had been talking, Manfred had 
cold shivers running down his spine. He had suddenly 
understood that hypnosis could bring about serious 
changes in a very short time. As a hypnotist, however, 
one obviously also had to be very careful and precise. 


"Ts it possible," he asked, "to correct such a suggestion 
that has proved to be incorrect? "One can", explained 
Mrs. Papenfuf. "This requires, however, that the hypno- 
tist has worked precisely and recorded the suggestion 
verbatim.“ 


"Effective suggestions", she mused, "are always only 
the second best solution anyway. With SOL Hypnosis we 
hardly ever use effective suggestions. And if there is no 
other way, for example, if there is no sufficient depth of 
trance for analytical hypnosis, then we clearly discuss 
these suggestions with our clients before hypnosis. We 
formulate them carefully and check them together with 
our clients in all directions. Then the effective sugges- 
tion is written down word for word and countersigned by 
our clients. During the hypnosis we then read the sug- 
gestion literally. But, as already mentioned, we hardly 


39 


ever use such suggestions. The main advantage of an ef- 
fective suggestion, however, is that it is already well ac- 
cepted by the subconscious at a very low trance depth. 
In this respect, effective suggestions are exactly the 
right choice when the hypnotisand reaches only a low 
trance depth. However, this is the exception rather than 
the rule". 


Communication with the subconscious mind 


"What are you doing instead?" Manfred asked curi- 
ously. "Very simple", explained the hypnotherapist. "We 
induce the deepest possible trances in an absolutely neu- 
tral way by only suggesting well-being and relaxation - 
nothing else. Hereby we rule out that we are suggesting 
anything unintentional. And when a sufficient depth of 


40 


trance has been reached, which we can easily recognize 
by the eye movements and facial features, then we do 
the simplest and most natural thing in the world: We 
ask the subconscious mind for the cause of the problem. 
The subconscious knows everything! It knows every sin- 
gle detail about us, but also about all contexts and di- 
mensions that are far beyond our conscious perception. 


Unconsciously, we are connected at all times with 
everything that exists - also with every other human be- 
ing, but also with dimensions and entities to which we 
have no access on our conscious, rational level. This con- 
nection is given by a subtle, psychic energy. We radiate 
this energy through our body's own energy field, our 
aura, in the form of energy waves. The nature of these 
energy waves depends on our current feelings and our 
unconscious beliefs. We emit energy waves that are re- 
ceived by other people and at the same time we receive 
energy waves. So, we are always in unconscious interac- 
tion with our environment. The dimension in which this 
alternating effect of psychic energies takes place is not 
bound to the dimension of space and time as we perceive 
them daily. This energetic interaction therefore also 
takes place thousands of kilometers away. As I have al- 
ready said, our energetic hypnoses open up much larger 
dimensions, much larger than we can consciously ever 
imagine - and with undreamt-of perspectives for our life 
and our entire being. “ 


Manfred had opened his eyes in amazement and dis- 
belief the more the hypnosis-therapist started to rave. 


41 


Until now he had been deeply impressed by everything 
she had explained to him. It had sounded unbelievable 
to him in places, but he had still been able to understand 
everything logically. And that was important for him. 
But now they had reached a point that was beyond any 
logical approach. "That sounds absolutely fantastic, ab- 
solutely unbelievable," he said. He looked doubtfully at 
the hypnotherapist. 


"That's it," she said, "It's just not conceivable for all 
our conscious thinking. It cannot be experienced 
through our five senses and it admittedly does not fit 
into a mechanistic world view that many people have in 
our technology and success-oriented environment. But, 
she continued, it is nevertheless absolute reality. A su- 
perordinate reality, which is derived from the uncon- 
scious and which we as hypnotherapists experience 
again and again in almost all hypnoses. And when I say 
experienced, then I mean hundreds and hundreds of me- 
ticulously recorded hypnosis sessions, which my col- 
league and I have written down in over ten years.“ 


"Would you like another coffee?" Manfred nodded in 
delight, "yes, I'd love some", he murmured. For him, eve- 
rything he had experienced so far about the subcon- 
scious, unconscious programs and their effects on life 
was completely new territory - but it was logically un- 
derstandable. That he should be unconsciously con- 
nected with all other people and even beings in other di- 
mensions seemed to him almost unbelievable. But fi- 
nally Mrs. Papenfu had explained to him very credibly 


42 


that she and her colleague had already had this experi- 
ence in many hypnoses and had even recorded every sin- 
gle one. Should it really be possible that he lived in a 
much greater reality than the one he could see with his 
own eyes every day? 


Manfred began to brood. If the hypnotherapist was 
right, his suddenly rising jealousy attacks might have 
originated in his own subconscious. All the worries that 
tormented him now would have been caused uncon- 
sciously by himself - not the others, as he had always 
believed. For him this idea was absolutely incredible. It 
was even completely absurd. But he continued to brood, 
if it were true, he would have suffered all his life from a 
phenomenon he could not have influenced. For a mo- 
ment, once again and very calmly, he concentrated: If it 
really was the case that his subconscious was a million 
times faster than his conscious, logical thinking, then he 
would never be able to do anything about his fits of jeal- 
ousy. He wouldn't have a chance to do so either, if the 
unconscious program "jealousy" would only be executed 
twice as fast as he could with his conscious thinking. But 
a million times faster - then he would not have the 
slightest chance to consciously get his jealousy under 
control. 


As these thoughts went through his mind, his willing- 
ness to be hypnotized by Mrs. Papenfuf increased dra- 
matically. He was eager to let go of his jealousy and all 
the disappointment, anger and finally the suffering that 


43 


went with it. And in hypnosis he now saw his chance to 
do so. He wanted to use this chance in any case. 


With a gentle voice the hypnotherapist tore him out 
of his thoughts. "Well, was that a bit much?" It took 
quite a long time until Manfred answered. "No, it wasn't 
too much, but it sounds so unbelievable to me that my 
whole view of the world just got mixed up. Significantly 
and determinedly he continued: "I would like to have a 
hypnosis treatment. I really want to. I now see a real 
chance to solve my problem. And I trust you", he added. 


"Fine," said the hypnotherapist happily. She got up 
and went to the closet. When she came back, she had a 
writing board in her hand on which some forms were 
clamped. It had become completely dark outside, so that 
the lights of occasional passing cars were reflected in the 
panes of the high arched windows. Mrs. PapenfuB drew 
the room-high, white linen curtains. "This is our regis- 
tration sheet," she explained and handed Manfred the 
writing board with the forms. She sat back down on the 
sofa and looked at Manfred: "This sheet," she continued, 
"contains some very personal questions. It is very im- 
portant that you fill it out completely so that I can un- 
derstand your problem and your objectives. I will leave 
you alone for half an hour. And as if she could read your 
mind, she continued, "Of course, all your details, as well 
as everything discussed in these rooms, will be treated 
in the strictest confidence. I commit myself to this on the 
supplementary sheet with my signature. Manfred felt 


44 


that it was getting serious. A slight nervousness arose 
in him. 


SOL Hypnosis and medicine 


"Before we continue, I formally inform you that our 
hypnosis treatments are not medical treatments. Of 
course, our treatment does not replace medical treat- 
ment by a doctor or psychotherapist. Manfred raised his 
head in amazement. "That is perfectly clear to me", he 
replied. "Surely you don't need to mention that 


45 


particularly." "Yes," replied the hypnotherapist, "this ex- 
planation is very important in order to comply with the 
current jurisdiction of the Federal Republic of Germany. 
The practice of medicine in the medical sense is reserved 
for licensed doctors. In addition, alternative practition- 
ers may practise medicine "without appointment". This 
is clearly regulated in the “Heilpraktiker-Gesetz’, the 
so-called HPG. 


The treatments that we carry out in our clinic are 
something completely different from conventional medi- 
cine". Mrs. PapenfuB grinned impishly. "Imagine that 
you go to a doctor. And then you tell him that you are 
energetically connected to allem, which is existing. And 
if you then explain to him that you can perceive this con- 
nection via your subconscious in hypnosis, what do you 
think the doctor would say? He would probably look at 
you pitifully and say: "Oh yes, well, then lie down there. 
Now two young, strong men are coming. They will bring 
you a chic white jacket. You put it on and go with the 
men. And then everything will be fine again!“ 


"But aren't you a hypnotherapist?" asked Manfred 
somewhat confused. "Yes", answered Mrs. PapenfuB 
with a smile. "I am SOL hypnotherapist. Mr. Mooren 
and I have freely chosen this professional title to de- 
scribe the profession we practice here. We are also al- 
lowed to do so in full compliance with Article 12 of the 
German Constitution, which lays down the right to 
choose our profession freely. And I think that this job 
title very accurately reflects the therapeutic activities 


46 


we carry out in our company. Herewith we clearly dis- 
tinguish ourselves from any form of show hypnosis.“ 


The word "therapist", she continued, "comes from 
Greek and means "practitioner". And since we do hypno- 
sis treatments, we have chosen the term "hypno-thera- 
pist" for our activity. The type of hypnosis we perform is 
indicated by the addition "SOL". SOL stands for the 
name of our hypnosis center: "Spirit-Of-Light". All in all, 
we carry out hypnosis treatments according to a self-de- 
veloped system, which has absolutely nothing to do with 
medical treatments and of course does not replace them. 
And here we have to point out what I have just done in 
detail.“ 


The hypnotherapist poured herself a glass of water 
and took a sip. "And now," she continued, "come into 
play, Mr. Schneider - and with you any other of our cli- 
ents who come to us with their very personal problem. It 
makes no difference whether it is a physical illness, a 
psychological disorder or any other stressful problem. 
Everyone who comes to us to be treated with our method 
is a responsible, free citizen. And as such, they are of 
course entitled to decide for themselves, on their own re- 
sponsibility, whether, how and by whom they wish to be 
treated or not. And so that he can make this decision for 
himself, we are obliged to point out to him that our 
method of treatment is no substitute for medical treat- 
ment. This is precisely the view taken by the Federal 
Constitutional Court, which in its judgment 1 BvR 
784/03 has created clear legal certainty in this respect. 


47 


Of course, we do not make any promises of salvation or 
success, which would be highly dubious. Of course, we 
do not make diagnoses either, firstly because we are not 
able to do so, let alone allowed to do so, and secondly 
because this is completely superfluous with our method. 


In the hypnotic trance we simply ask the subcon- 
scious for the cause of the problem. By asking specific 
questions, which we then deduce from each answer, and 
by anchoring them, we cause the subconscious to solve 
the problem. And since the subconscious controls all bod- 
ily functions, i.e. every single cell, it can also bring about 
the healing of physical diseases. 


Since our activity is not medical, we are not subject to 
the control of medical institutions with our "Therapy 
and Training Centre for Hypnosis & Mental Energetics". 
We are subject to the control of the trade supervisory 
authority with our activity.“ 


Manfred had followed Mrs. Papenful' detailed expla- 
nations with great interest. Yes, his decision was abso- 
lutely certain. He wanted hypnosis and hoped to be 
cured of his pathological jealousy. He finally wanted to 
be free - free from his irrational fear of loss and free from 
his pathological compulsion to control. He did not want 
to lose Doris under any circumstances. Yes, he wanted 
hypnosis. And yes, he had full confidence in his hypno- 
therapist. 


"Do you have any more questions?" he was ripped out 
of his thoughts. Manfred looked up. "No", he replied, 


48 


"You have explained everything to me in detail and I am 
incredibly curious to know how it feels to be under hyp- 
nosis. "Great", the hypnotherapist rejoiced and pointed 
with her hand to the writing board with the registration 
sheet. "Now I would like to ask you to fill in this form 
completely. It contains very personal questions, but as 
you know, I assure you of my full discretion. If you 
agree," she continued, "then I will leave you alone for 
half an hour and then you can fully concentrate on the 
questions.“ 


Manfred nodded, "Of course", he replied. And while 
Frau PapenfuB stood up and left the room, he turned to 
the registration sheet. 


The registration form 


Name, address, profession and contact details, 
Manfred routinely filled in all this. What do you want to 
achieve with hypnosis? To get rid of my jealousy, it shot 
through his head. He was electrified by the thought of 
finally getting rid of his fear of loss and the constant jeal- 
ousy attacks that arose from it. He had suffered from 
this all his life. His two previous marriages and every 
relationship thereafter had all failed because of his 


49 


sudden, inexplicable jealousy attacks. Every day of his 
life he had been busy suppressing his emerging jealousy. 
That took a lot of strength. And it constricted him. He 
wished for nothing more than to enjoy his life free of all 
fears together with Doris. Yes, that's what he wanted to 
achieve with hypnosis. 


Manfred wrote and wrote. He conscientiously an- 
swered all twenty-seven questions concerning his 
wishes, his fears and goals in life, but also his state of 
health. 


The preliminary talk 


At the moment he was about to sign the registration 
form, there was a knock at the door and Mrs. PapenfuB 
stepped in. "I have just finished", Manfred answered her 
unspoken question. "Great", smiled the hypnotherapist 
and sat down comfortably in her seat. "Then we can 
start. Or would you like to take a little break before?" 


50 


The thought of a break was tempting for Manfred, but 
he was eager to start hypnosis. "No, we can start right 
away", he answered and handed her the registration 
form. 


Mrs. Papenfuf continued: "We have talked at length 
about the effects of unconscious programs and about our 
kind of hypnosis therapy. That was the general part. Do 
you have any more questions? Manfred shook his head. 
"No, what you have explained to me sounds unbelievable 
to me, but still absolutely logical. No, I have no more 
questions about that." "Good, then we will now come to 
your very personal problems“ 


Full of expectation Manfred slid back and forth in his 
chair. He was aware that things were about to get seri- 


ous and that made him a bit nervous. Absent-mindedly 
he stroked his right thigh. 


"Therapeutic hypnosis," continued Mrs. PapenfuB, "is 
a very personal matter which requires complete mutual 
trust. The subconscious is best addressed with the famil- 
lar "you". In this respect we should at this point abandon 
the formal "you". Do you agree with this?" Manfred nod- 
ded happily. The hypnotherapist leaned forward and 
stretched out her hand to him. "My name is Brigitte." 
Manfred shook her hand. "I am that Manfred." He felt 
how he became visibly calmer in this moment. 


The hypnotherapist read Manfred's details on the 
registration form intensively. When she had finished, 
she looked at Manfred in a friendly way: "Your jealousy 


51 


is an enormous burden for you. When did you first real- 
ise that you were so jealous?“ 


"Yes", replied Manfred, "my jealousy accompanies me 
day after day. It is a terrible burden for me. And also for 
my wife," he added. "So far, every relationship I have 
had has failed because of my jealousy. I cannot tell you 
when that started. Actually, it has always been like that. 
To be honest, for many years I have considered my jeal- 
ousy to be perfectly normal. I have always seen the rea- 
son for my jealousy attacks in the respective situation. 


"And how did you get the idea that the cause of your 
jealousy attacks could be you," Brigitte asked. "About fif- 
teen or sixteen years ago, when my second marriage was 
on the brink, my then wife and I sought help from a psy- 
chotherapist. It soon turned out that the cause of our 
problems at that time was me - in other words, my 
pathological jealousy. At least that was perfectly clear to 
the psychotherapist," Manfred added. 


"So?" Brigitte looked at him and asked, "Is that why 
you got treatment?" "Yes and no," murmured Manfred 
somewhat bashfully. "I have started a talking therapy. 
But after the fifth session I stopped this therapy." "And 
why?", Brigitte looked at him questioningly. "The reason 
was very simple for me at the time: my ex-wife had 
moved out in the meantime and had filed for divorce. In 
this situation I didn't care about the therapy, which I 
deeply regret today. Because now I am back with my 
wife Doris at the same point where I was then. “ 


52 


"Good", the hypnotherapist looked at him encourag- 
ingly. "Then we'll leave it at that and if you agree, we'll 
ask your subconscious about the cause of your jealousy 
during the hypnosis.“ 


She made a note and asked further: "When asked 
what you are most afraid of, you list "fear of being aban- 
doned", "fear of failing in your job" and "fear of being 
alone", in that order. Can you tell me something about 
this?“ 


"Somehow it all seems to be connected," replied 
Manfred. He took a very long break. "When I think about 
it now, I'm terribly afraid of being alone. I just can't be 
alone, because then I feel abandoned by everyone and I 
feel terribly sad. And then I get more and more involved 
in this deep sadness. Then I have the feeling of not being 
noticed by anyone, of simply being worth nothing," he 
added quietly. "Losing my wife would be the worst thing 
I could imagine. That's why I also feel that I always have 
to be enough. And failure is not an option, especially at 
work. That's why I constantly put myself under pres- 
sure. That actually works quite well. But when I get an 
attack of jealousy, I ruin everything again.“ 


"We'll use hypnosis to find out, shall we?" Manfred 
nodded. 


Brigitte leafed through the registration form. "You 
write here that you have a high blood pressure of 
130/160, which even rises to values of 250/150 during 
jealousy attacks. On the other hand, you are taking the 


53 


drug "Rasilez 300". You are under constant treatment by 
your GP and a neurologist and you had surgery on your 
head three years ago because of an aneurysm on the ar- 
teria communicans.“ 


"You'll have to explain all this to me a bit more, 
please," Brigitte continued. "What is this aneurysm op- 
eration, for example?" Manfred absently took one of the 
truffle chocolates that had been laughing at him the 
whole time. As he removed the gold-colored aluminum 
foil, he began to tell: 


"Immediately before this, I had a violent attack of 
jealousy. I was completely beside myself and I was ter- 
ribly upset. I was, as they say, literally bursting. My 
partner at the time was having an affair with a work 
colleague. Or rather, I was convinced that she had one. 
That day I was at home and had tried to reach her in the 
office at lunchtime. Someone told me that she had taken 
the afternoon off and left with a colleague. She did not 
answer her mobile phone either. 


Then I waited for her and was terribly afraid of losing 
her." Manfred swallowed. "The hours passed, but she 
never came. And while I waited for her a violent jealousy 
attack began to rise up inside me. The longer it lasted, 
the more my thoughts circled, and I became angrier and 
angrier." It was obviously difficult for Manfred to remain 
calm. Absent, he rubbed himself across his right thigh 
as he continued: "Finally I was so angry and felt so hurt 
that I started to pack her suitcases. Or rather, I tore 


54 


their clothes off the hangers and threw them into the 
suitcases. I wanted to put the suitcases in front of the 
door and change the lock. I had done this before. 


And when I opened the next suitcase, I must have re- 
ceived some kind of "blow". Anyway, all of a sudden, I 
had an insane headache, my eyes went black and then I 
must have fallen over. How long I lay between the half- 
packed suitcases, I don't know. It could have been one or 
maybe two hours. Then I woke up again and straight- 
ened up. But it took a long time, because I perceived eve- 
rything as if in slow motion, but after a while I could 
move almost normally again. Only the insane headaches 
were still there. 


Then my former partner came home and was of 
course completely horrified. Fortunately, she noticed in 
a flash what kind of condition I was in and immediately 
called the ambulance. When the paramedics came, I lost 
consciousness again and the next thing I remember is 
the hospital recovery room. As soon as I opened my eyes, 
this infinite anger rose up again and I started to riot in 
the recovery room. Two nurses had to hold me down. I 
am so sorry for all this. While he was saying this, tears 
came to Manfred's eyes. He sobbed loudly. Then he be- 
gan to cry bitterly. 


The hypnotherapist calmly reached under the tab- 
letop and pulled out a box of cosmetic tissues that had 
already been opened. Wordlessly she held the box out to 
Manfred. Still sobbing, he pulled out two tissues and 


55 


Brigitte placed the box on the table in front of him. Re- 
laxed, she leaned back into her sofa and waited patiently 
until Manfred had calmed down. 


"Excuse me," Manfred looked at her bashfully. "I 
don't know how it could have happened now." "There's 
nothing to apologize for here," Brigitte explained to him 
friendly. "It is perfectly normal for emotions to run high 
and tears to flow in these rooms. That's what the paper 
towels are for." Brigitte waited a little while longer until 
Manfred had calmed down completely and then contin- 
ued with her questions: 


"And what exactly happened there now?" she asked. 
Manfred looked at her calmly: "I must have been so en- 
raged while I was packing my suitcase that an aneu- 
rysm, 1.e. a dilation of a blood vessel, had formed on an 
artery in my head. Immediately after I was taken to hos- 
pital, the doctors performed an emergency operation. 
And when I woke up in the recovery room afterwards, I 
was probably still in the same situation I was in when I 
packed my suitcase. It took quite a while before I even 
realized what had happened. In any case, I am deeply 
grateful to my partner and the doctors. As the surgeon 
later told me, my life was probably on a knife edge. That 
was about three years ago now.“ 


Manfred breathed audibly. He was glad that he had 
told this experience in all openness. He felt visibly re- 
lieved. 


56 


"Has this disease now been completely cured or does 
it still affect you in any way?" asked Brigitte. "Fortu- 
nately, that has been completely cured. The only prob- 
lem I still have is my high blood pressure. That's why 
I'm under constant medical treatment and have to take 
blood pressure reducers regularly. In addition, I often 
have stomach problems and dizziness. This has been go- 
ing on for several years now. Due to the constantly high 
blood pressure, I now also have heart problems". "Heart 
problems?", asked Brigitte. "And how do they manifest 
themselves?" "I don't really notice anything," explained 
Manfred, "but I have of course been having regular med- 
ical check-ups for years and my doctors have discovered 
that I now have a thickened heart muscle.“ 


"So your only, albeit obviously quite serious health 
problem is your high blood pressure?", Brigitte went into 
it again. "Yes", Manfred replied. "But that's quite 
enough for me," he grinned. 


"The questions about addiction and seizure illnesses, 
diabetes and mental illness were also answered in the 
negative on the registration form," confirmed Brigitte. 
"But I'd rather always ask again here. "Why do you want 
to know all this so precisely," Manfred asked. 


"Quite simply because it is very important," Brigitte 
explained. "I will put you in a state of hypnotic trance 
right away, if you still want to, then. In this state your 
brain works at full speed. It uses up a lot of sugar. If you 
were a diabetic now, you could adjust to it with 


57 


medication. For example, if you had allergies, let's say a 
pollen allergy, then I would avoid any situation during 
hypnosis in which you would be confronted with pollen. 


And if you had a seizure disorder, for example epi- 
lepsy or asthma, I would not hypnotize you at all. Be- 
cause then during hypnosis we could possibly get into a 
situation that I could no longer control. And to make 
sure that this does not happen, any form of hypnosis is 
absolutely out of the question for clients who suffer from 
seizure disorders.“ 


Manfred looked at Brigitte with big eyes. He became 
more and more aware that hypnosis had to be prepared 
with the utmost care. This is exactly what was happen- 
ing here, and he felt he was in good hands. "And what 
happens to my high blood pressure during the hypno- 
sis?" he asked excitedly. "It makes more work for me," 
grinned Brigitte. "During hypnosis the blood pressure 
drops and with it the body temperature. If you had ex- 
tremely low blood pressure, I would ask you to talk to 
your doctor before hypnosis so that he can tell you 
whether hypnosis can be performed or not. For you, the 
exact opposite is now the case. You still have considera- 
bly higher blood pressure despite your antihyperten- 
sives. This means that your body is still working at full 
speed even when you are lying on a bed completely re- 
laxed. For me, this means that it will probably take 
longer to bring you to the required depth of trance. And 
that is what I mean by "more work", grinned Brigitte. 
"Joking aside", she continued with her explanations. 


58 


"Hypnosis is felt to be very relaxing by the hyp-noti- 
sands, that's what we call the one who is hypnotized. But 
for the body it is a great effort. Pulse and blood pressure 
are lowered and the sugar level is also reduced. At the 
same time, the brain frequencies drop significantly, 
which is not the worst thing," she smiled, "and the body 
still cools down, but we have nice, warm blankets 
against that," explained Brigitte. "In total, a hypnosis 
should therefore last a maximum of forty-five minutes, 
in exceptional cases a few minutes longer, but not signif- 
icantly.“ 


"If you agree," she continued, "then during hypnosis 
we can also ask your subconscious to activate your self- 
healing powers so that your subconscious can solve your 
blood pressure problem. Manfred opened his eyes wide. 
"You're not serious, are you? I've been struggling with 
my high blood pressure for at least twenty-five years and 
now you casually ask me whether you should hypnotize 
him away. "Sort of," Brigitte grinned happily. "Just hyp- 
notize him away - I can't! But I asked you whether you 
would like me to ask you, or rather your own subcon- 
scious, during the hypnosis if you still need your illness 
and, if not, whether it can control your body functions in 
the future in such a way that there is a clear improve- 
ment step by step until you are finally rid of the problem. 
One can ask questions, can't one? But of course only if 
you want to," she added. 


Manfred looked at her in disbelief. He no longer un- 
derstood the world. Everything he had heard so far was 


59 


completely new to him, strange, it sounded unbelievable 
- but it was logical. But that his own subconscious - that 
is, he himself now - should cure his chronic illness 
sounded absolutely fantastic. For him this idea was be- 
yond all imagination. And yet, as he just had to admit to 
himself, it was absolutely logical. If the subconscious 
controlled all bodily functions and every cell in the body, 
then it could of course also heal illnesses. 


"Yes, or yes?", Brigitte tore him out of his thoughts. 
"A clear, unequivocal and very specific "yes", Manfred 
answered hopefully. "Good, then during the hypnosis I 
will ask your subconscious to activate your self-healing 
powers. Brigitte made a note on the registration sheet. 


"There is just one thing I would like to make very 
clear to you at this point: There is no guarantee that you 
will go into a hypnotic trance and there is no guarantee 
that you can solve your jealousy problem and your blood 
pressure problem. But," she mischievously added, "your 
subconscious and I will do our best to help you.“ 


"So", Brigitte continued, "I think we have now dis- 
cussed everything in detail. Would you now like to do a 
hypnosis therapy, or do you have any questions?" "Yes", 
Manfred replied, "we can start right away’. He could 
hardly wait for the hypnosis. 


"Great, let's take a short break now. Maybe you 
should use this opportunity to go to the toilet so that you 
don't jump off the couch during the hypnosis", grinned 
Brigitte. 


60 


"Oh, by the way, I still have one more question," the 
hypnotherapist looked at him with concentration. 
"What's wrong with your right thigh?" Manfred looked 
at her in complete surprise. "You noticed that? There's 
nothing, nothing at all with the leg, at least that's what 
my doctors say. I have sharp pains here from time to 
time, mostly when I'm excited. But that is completely in- 
explicable, because the leg is organically probably com- 
pletely healthy. The doctors find nothing. My neurolo- 
gist thinks it is a somatoform disorder, that is, phantom 
pain. But for me it's a real disorder, because it hurts like 
hell sometimes," he added. "Could you ask about that 
too?" he asked hopefully. 


"Sure, let's do it", the hypnotherapist grinned at him 
and made a note. "I'll be back in ten minutes and then 
we'll get started, okay?" Manfred nodded, "Of course, I 
can hardly wait. But in silence he was happy to be able 
to relax for a few more minutes after the hypnotherapist 
had left the room. 


61 


The positive resource 


Manfred was sitting in his armchair expectantly 
when there was a knock at the door and Brigitte entered 
the room. "Well," she said encouragingly, "let's get going. 
Before we start now, I need one more word from you. 
One word that you personally associate with a really 
great, positive feeling for yourself. I don't need to know 
the feeling or the situation you associate with this word. 
I just need the word that triggers this positive feeling in 
you. 


"Racing bike", Manfred replied spontaneously. "I had 
a great experience with a racing bike when I was a little 
boy." Manfred beamed. "Shall I tell you about it now?" 
"No", smiled Brigitte, "the word 'racing bike' is quite 
enough for me. We call this a "positive resource". And for 
me that is something like an anchor I can throw if you 
get too emotional in hypnosis. Then I simply say "racing 


62 


bike" and you will immediately feel that you associate 
with this word. Brigitte wrote down the word on the reg- 
istration sheet. 


Preparation of hypnosis 


"Then please follow me quietly." Brigitte opened the 
door to the next room. She entered and Manfred followed 
her, "This is our treatment room," Brigitte explained. 
This room also resembled more a living room than a 
treatment room, if there hadn't been a treatment couch 
covered with a snow-white woolen blanket. On one side 
of the room were two of the room-high arched windows, 
which Manfred already knew from the meeting room. 
Along the walls were cupboards and bookcases. Every- 
thing seemed very cosy and reassuring 


"If you would please take off your shoes and your belt, 
and if you would also please take off all metal that you 
don't always wear, which is not part of the system, that 
would be great. You can take your clothes off there." She 
pointed to an armchair in the corner of the room. "If 
you're wearing a wedding ring, you're welcome to keep 


63 


it on." Manfred took off his shoes and placed them neatly 
in front of the armchair. "The watch too?", he asked after 
he had taken off his belt. "Do you also wear the watch at 
night, twenty-four hours a day, every day?", asked Brig- 
itte. "Of course not", replied Manfred. "Then the watch 
too," smiled Brigitte. 


"What we are about to do is an energetic hypnosis", 
she explained, "in which I will amplify the universal en- 
ergy that we are all connected to at any given moment 
through our aura by simply asking for it in gratitude. By 
aura I mean the energy field that surrounds every hu- 


man being. In this way," she continues, "I can conduct 
the dialogue with your subconscious both verbally and 
energetically at the same time. This means that we will 
be energetically connected to each other in such a way 
that I will intuitively come up with the right questions 
and anchors to get your subconscious to solve your prob- 
lems - at least I hope so," she added mischievously. "And 
we don't want any interference from your watch, do we?" 
"That's all right," Manfred gave in with a laugh in his 
voice and put the watch down. Brigitte pulled her key 
out of her trouser pocket and put it on a shelf. 


"So," she said, "then please lie down on the couch. 
Manfred looked at her questioningly. "With your head 
here or there?", he asked. "With your head to here," said 
Brigitte and pointed to the semicircular pillow, which 
was covered with a fresh, white cloth. Manfred sat down 
on the couch and then lay on his back. Brigitte posi- 
tioned the little cushion just below his neck and asked: 


64 


"Is that pleasant? Manfred turned his head to the right 
and left. "Oh yes, very, thank you". "This funny little 
cushion is called a neck cushion. It supports the neck 
very well, especially when you lie on your back for a long 
time", explained Brigitte. 


She went to his feet. "Could you please raise your legs 
a little bit?" Manfred lifted his stretched legs. "Good for 
the stomach muscles," joked Brigitte and pushed the 
wedge-shaped, thick vein cushion under his legs into the 
right position. "Now you can put your legs down again," 
she asked him. "Are you lying comfortably like that?" 
For Manfred, the position in which his legs were sup- 
ported along their entire length was very unusual. But 
it was extremely comfortable. "Yes," he replied, "that's 
very comfortable. "Yes," Brigitte explained, "this effec- 
tively relieves the spine. And now I'll pull your trousers 
up tight," she gurgled and at the same moment tugged 
lightly on his trouser legs. "I do that so that no pressure 
points form in the area of the back of the knees. In hyp- 
nosis, you feel every little touch much more strongly 
than with day-consciousness," she explained, "and then 
even a small fold in your trousers can be extremely un- 
pleasant.“ 


"Would you like to be tucked in?" "Not really," 
Manfred replied. "I find it quite warm here." "It is, but 
your body could cool down quite a bit under hypnosis. 
And before you freeze afterwards, I'd take a blanket if I 
were you." "All right", Manfred agreed, "if you think so.“ 


65 


Brigitte took a big, cuddly, white wool blanket and 
covered Manfred up to his neck. "Please leave your arms 
outside", she asked Manfred, "I'll cover them separately 
with the ends of the blanket. That way you'll be wrapped 
up nice and warm and can still move your arms freely 
when you feel like it. Brigitte went to his feet, pulled the 
blanket smooth and routinely put the tips of the blanket 
between his feet above the vein cushion. Then she briefly 
pulled the tips of her toes free so that no pressure points 
could form here either. 


Relaxed, she sat down on the roll-up stool on 
Manfred's right side and supported herself slightly with 
her hands on the couch. "Are you excited?", she asked 
him in a changed, very calm and friendly voice. "A little 
bit," admitted Manfred, "That's quite normal during the 
first hypnosis, but it will subside soon. Just close your 
eyes, breathe calmly and evenly and relax as best you 
can. Nothing will happen to you, big Indian - word of 
honor. Now I'm going to make us some music and switch 
off the bright wall lights. You can absolutely rely on me 
being by your side during the entire hypnosis. You are 
completely safe.“ 


Brigitte stood up slowly. Then she went very slowly 
to the light switch. She switched off the wall lighting and 
switched on the music. The whole room was now bathed 
in a pleasantly diffuse light emitted by the floor lamps. 
It was bright enough for her to read without any effort, 
but at the same time dimmed so that the light was not 
perceived as disturbing or dazzling. A very quiet, 


66 


soothing music was played, consisting of seemingly ran- 
domly sequential tones and sounds that merged gently. 


Brigitte sat down again carefully on the stool and 
looked at Manfred, who lay there with closed eyes and 
breathed calmly. Then she rolled back a little and con- 
centrated on the upcoming hypnosis. Brigitte felt an in- 
finite gratitude rising in her to be allowed to do this 
work. In this feeling of boundless gratitude, she became 
aware of her constant, unconscious connection to every- 
thing that exists. At the same time, she felt the enor- 
mous power rising within her, which had its origin in 
this connection with all dimensions of being. In her 
thoughts she asked for the energies of light for the high- 
est good of Manfred and thus for the highest good of all 
that is - whatever the highest good might be. She felt 
how her aura connected with that of Manfred and how 
her vibrations began to resonate more and more with 
those of Manfred. She was completely filled with love, 
harmony and gratitude. 


Then Brigitte took a deep breath and looked at the 
small clock on the shelf next to Manfred's head. She took 
her writing board and noted meticulously: "Start: 18:47." 
She rolled forward a little and addressed Manfred in a 
very soft and calm voice: 


"Open your eyes, please." Manfred opened his eyes 
and looked at her absently. "Can we begin?" she asked. 
"Yes." "Good", the hypnotherapist gently confirmed. "Is 
it your free will and desire to go into this hypnosis, that 


67 


is, to sink into a deep relaxation and be in it?" Manfred 
nodded. As she spoke, Brigitte had held her right hand 
about forty centimeters above Manfred's eyes and she 
now moved slightly the triangle she formed with her 
thumb, index and middle finger. "Can you see the point 
between my fingers?" "Yes", Manfred replied. "Good, 
then please follow this point with your eyes.“ 


68 


Introduction by eye fixation 


Brigitte moved her fingers slowly to the right and 
then to the left again. Manfred's pupils followed the 
movement. They were fixed exactly on the point between 
Brigitte's fingers. Calmly and evenly she moved the 
point from right to left and back again, keeping the dis- 
tance to Manfred's eyes exactly the same. The move- 
ments happened by themselves. Brigitte's full concen- 
tration was directed at Manfred's pupils, which she con- 
trolled with her movements. With each of these horizon- 
tal movements she moved the pupils a little upwards, so 
that Manfred's gaze was directed towards his eyebrows. 
The pupils moved evenly from right to left. 


Manfred lay comfortably on the couch and concen- 
trated on following the point between Brigitte's fingers. 
By now he found it extremely strenuous and it became 
more and more tiring the further he had to move his eyes 


upwards. He could hardly keep his eyes open anymore 
and he felt himself blinking. 


"Your eyes are already blinking," he heard Brigitte's 
intimate voice say, "maybe your eyes are getting more 
and more tired and tired and maybe you feel the desire 
to close your eyes.“ 


69 


Yes, Manfred felt how tired his eyes were getting and 
he actually wished for only one thing at that moment, 
namely to be allowed to close his eyes. Strained, his pu- 
pils followed the evenly wandering point between Brig- 
itte's fingers. It became more and more tedious. 


"T will now count from three to one and when I reach 
one, I will touch your forehead. Then you will close your 
eyes and immediately slide into a pleasant, deep relaxa- 
tion, into a deep, hypnotic trance.“ 


Manfred's pupils hardly managed to follow the point. 
His eyes were extremely strained and he only longed to 
finally hear the redeeming number one. 


"Three", said the voice, gently but accentuated - "two" 


a" 6 


one. 


He felt his forehead being touched at the number 
"one". That was the signal of salvation for him. His eyes 
closed and he just let himself fall, fall into a deep, pleas- 
ant relaxation. 


For Manfred's feeling it had taken an eternity before 
he was finally allowed to close his eyes. In reality it had 
taken just thirty seconds. 


70 


The report structure 


Brigitte rolled back a little from the couch. She had 
her eyes completely focused on Manfred's eyes and his 
breathing, which was calm and even. 


"Deeper and deeper and deeper you glide into pleas- 
ant relaxation, into a deep, hypnotic trance. Deeper and 
deeper and deeper.“ 


Brigitte's voice sounded calm and soft, but still firm 
and accentuated. She stretched the vowels a bit and 
spoke in a wavy rhythm. 


"Please concentrate only on my voice and the pleasant 
music in the background." 


"And with every word of my voice and with every note 
of the music, you will glide deeper and deeper into the 
pleasant, deep relaxation." 


Manfred swallowed visibly and there was also a slight 
belly gurgling. "Swallowing reflex" and "stomach gur- 
gling", "trance depth level I", Brigitte noted. The boy 
starts to go away. 


71 


"All other sounds are completely indifferent to you. 
They only let you slide deeper and deeper into the pleas- 
ant, deep relaxation. 


Deeper and deeper, deeper and deeper. 


Whenever I say the word "racing bike" to you during 
this hypnosis, you are immediately in the pleasant feel- 
ing that you associate with the word "racing bike".“ 

Manfred had a happy smile on his lips and his eyelids 
began to flutter slightly. He felt visibly well. "At the be- 
ginning of Trance Deepness Level II", i.e. at the begin- 
ning of twos, Brigitte thought contentedly. 


"During this whole hypnosis you will understand the 
German language as it is spoken today and you will an- 
swer all my questions only in the German language as 
we speak it today. 


If you do not perceive or understand my voice for more 
than three minutes during this hypnosis, you will imme- 
diately be completely awake, concentrated and orien- 
tated in the here and now, today, 30 November 2012, in 
complete health of body, mind and soul.“ 


The eyelid flutter of Manfred's eyelids had increased 
somewhat. "Stable twosome", Brigitte noted for herself. 


"Whenever I touch your forehead during this hypno- 
sis, like now (Brigitte touched Manfred lightly on his 
forehead), you slide ten times deeper into the pleasant, 
deep hypnotic trance. 


72 


Whenever I touch you on your right shoulder during 
this hypnosis, you open your eyes, seemingly awake, but 
remain in the state of the deep hypnotic trance.“ 


Deepening 


"Deeper and deeper, deeper and deeper, you slide into 
the pleasant, deep hypnotic trance, deeper and deeper 
and deeper. 


"And as deeper you glide into the relaxation, as more 
comfortable and relaxed you feel. And the more comfort- 
able you feel, the deeper and deeper you slide into deep, 
pleasant relaxation. Deeper and deeper and more com- 
fortable. More and more comfortable and deeper.“ 


Manfred was now in a stable, medium depth of 
trance, which the hypnotherapist could easily read from 
the fluttering eyelids. In this state he would perma- 
nently accept any suggestion. But this depth of trance 
was not yet sufficient for the direct question about the 
cause of his massive problems. Brigitte knew from expe- 
rience how Manfred felt about his current state: 


Manfred lay comfortably on his lounger in complete, 
deep relaxation. He surrendered himself to his pleasant, 
inner images, which flickered in him again and again. 
He felt completely awake, fresh and alert. He had the 
feeling that he could open his eyes and stand up at any 


73 


time. But he didn't want that at all. He gave himself up 
to his inner images. He did not care about anything. 
Again and again his own consciousness disturbed him 
with the statement I am not under hypnosis. It did not 
work. But he did not care about that either. 


74 


Catalepsy of the right leg 


Brigitte briefly considered whether she should 
deepen the trance or whether she should prove to 
Manfred beforehand that he was actually under hypno- 
sis. Afterwards the necessary depth of trance would cer- 
tainly be reached. She looked at the clock. It was clear 
to her that whatever she was going to do now would de- 
part from the time urgently needed for the later work 
phase. Levitation of the arm with subsequent catalepsy 
was ruled out. The "automatic" raising of an arm with 
subsequent stiffening would take far too long. So she de- 
cided to stiffen Manfred's right leg briefly. She wanted 
to sacrifice a minute for this. 


"I'm going to lightly touch your right leg a few times 
now". Immediately after she had announced the touch- 
ing, Brigitte stroked Manfred's covered right leg several 
times. While she gave such light impulses from hip to 
tiptoe, she began to suggest: 


"Your right leg becomes completely stiff, your right 
leg becomes completely stiff. More and more stiff and 
stiff. Your right leg is completely stiff and immobile. The 
leg is well supplied with blood, completely stiff and im- 
mobile. You can no longer move your right leg. And the 
more you try to move your right leg, the less you will 
succeed. Your right leg is completely stiff.“ 


79 


The fractionation 


Manfred's eyelids still fluttered, but now a little less 
than before. Brigitte spoke to him gently: 


"T will now touch you on your right shoulder." 


At that moment Brigitte lightly touched Manfred's 
shoulder. Manfred opened his eyes and looked at Brig- 
itte apathetically. 


"Are you all right?", Brigitte asked softly. "Yes", he 
murmured. He just felt disturbed and wanted to go back 
to his inner pictures. 


"Please try to move your left leg." Manfred moved his left 
foot a little and pulled the leg a little. "Good", praised 
the hypnotherapist. "And now please try to move your 
right leg." Manfred moved his gaze a little and seemed 
to exert himself, but his right leg remained completely 
motionless. "Can't you?", Brigitte asked softly. Manfred 
shook his head slightly. 


Brigitte touched Manfred slightly on the forehead 
with her middle finger. "Deeper, deeper and deeper and 
deeper you glide into the pleasant, deep hypnotic trance. 
I will touch you lightly on your right leg several times." 
With these words Brigitte started to set light impulses 
again. 


76 


"Your right leg will become completely loose. Your 
right leg is completely loose and mobile. You can move 
your right leg normally again." 


The moment Brigitte had touched Manfred's fore- 
head, he had immediately slipped back into a deep hyp- 
notic trance. This could be seen in his violent eyelid flut- 
tering. His consciousness had also become calmer. It was 
now completely clear to him: Yes, it works, I am in hyp- 
nosis. 


Brigitte looked at the small digital clock on the shelf 
- 18:54. Seven minutes are already gone, she thought as 
she noted the time. But things are going quite well so 
far. 


77 


Regression and return 


"We're going to take a little trip now, a journey into 
your past. On this journey you are never alone. At every 
moment of this journey I will be with you. You are com- 
pletely safe. 


We are now walking together towards a beautiful, 
brightly lit house. You know this house. It is your house. 
It is the house of your entire life, of your entire being. 


Ten more steps and we have arrived at the large, in- 
viting entrance door. I now count backwards from ten to 
one and with each step and each number you slide ten 
times deeper into the pleasant state of deep, hypnotic 
trance. 

Ten - nine - eight - seven - six - five - four - three - two 


66 


“one. 


Manfred had twitched slightly at each number. His 
eyelids fluttered even more violently now. "End of twos," 
thought Brigitte, then on to the next. 


"We now enter the brightly lit entrance hall of your 
house. In the middle of this hall is a beautiful spiral 
staircase made of white marble. You know this staircase. 
It is your staircase. It is the staircase of your life, of your 
whole being. The staircase has no beginning and no end. 
It is endless. It has safe handrails on both sides and 
walking on this staircase is completely effortless. 


78 


Each step of this spiral staircase stands for a very 
specific period of your life and your entire being. It 
doesn't matter if it's a second, a minute, a day or a year. 


We are now stepping together on the step that repre- 
sents today, 30 November 2012, and at the end of our 
journey, no matter what we experience during our jour- 
ney, we will be standing on this step again - on the step 
of today, 30 November 2012.. 


We now look up together over the inner railing of your 
spiral staircase upwards. There is a light. It is a golden, 
glistening light. You know this light. It is your light. It 
is the light of your origin. The light of your entire being. 
The light of all-embracing, unconditional love. 


And now we look downwards. Here too is the light of 
all-embracing, unconditional love. The whole spiral 
staircase is flooded with the light of all-embracing, un- 
conditional love. The spiral staircase has no beginning 
and no end. Your spiral staircase is endless. 


When I say "go", we walk down the spiral staircase 
together. We then run to the situation of your present 
life or your whole being, where the cause of your present 
jealousy lies. And when you get there, you stop in front 
of the situation and tell me that you have arrived. 


Brigitte kept Manfred's eyes fixed during the whole 
hypnosis. The eyelid flutter had become even more in- 
tense and when he looked up and down the stairs, his 
eyes had turned in the respective direction under the 


79 


closed lids. Manfred was at the beginning of a deep 
trance, a trance of "stage III" or also called "somnambu- 
lism". Brigitte now knew that he would enter a deep 
trance on the stairs. 


"Go! And we run and run, faster and faster and faster, 
lap after lap down the spiral staircase. To the situation 
of your present life or your whole being, where the cause 
of your present jealousy lies. And when you get there, 
you stop in front of the situation and tell me that you 
have arrived. And we run and run and run, round and 
round. And with each round you slide deeper and deeper 
into the hypnotic trance, deeper and deeper.“ 


During these suggestions, Manfred's eyes had begun 
to roll behind his closed eyelids. His facial skin had be- 
come noticeably firmer. The face now resembled a wax 
figure. "Medium threesome," Brigitte stated, now allow- 
ing Manfred the time he needed to find the causative sit- 
uation for his jealousy. His eyes rolled, then they seemed 
to glance briefly in a certain direction again behind 
closed eyelids, then they began to roll again. This was 
repeated again and again until the eyes seemed to be 
fixed on a certain point behind the closed lids. "I see," 
thought Brigitte, "it's almost time. Suddenly Manfred 
whispered, "I've arrived.“ 


The triggering situation 


Brigitte began to ask: 


80 


"Do you have a name?“ 
"Have no name." 

"What do they call you?" 
"Gregor." 

"How old are you?" 
"Twenty-five. 

"What year is it? 

»1719." 

"What country are you in? 
"Germany.“ 

»Where are you?“ 

"In a big house - a castle." 


Manfred had lain relatively still on the couch until 
now, but now emotions began to rise in him. His eyes 
moved under the closed lids. Manfred searched and his 
whole body began to tremble slightly. Unmoved, the 
hypnotherapist asked her next questions. 


"What do you see?" 
"It's dark in here." 


"Is there anyone with you?" 


81 


"I'm alone." 
"Can you see anything now?" 
"A woman." 
"Do you know this woman?" 
"Don't know her, just see her." 
"And now? What happens now?" 
"She's looking at me." 
" And now? What happens now?" 
"It's a pretty woman - I can't reach her." 
"Where is this woman?" 


"Feeling, she's not there - I see her, but she doesn't 
see me - she's smiling." 


"Why doesn't she notice you?" 


"I'm standing in a corner, I'm watching the woman, 
she's cooking and she doesn't notice me." 


Manfred reared back violently. He was visibly under 
tension. 


"It's my wife," he pressed out, "Karlotta!“ 


Manfred had a violent coughing fit. He was visibly ag- 
itated. 


82 


"This is unreal," he gasped. 


The consciousness is interfering, the hypnotherapist 
remarked. 


"Deeper and deeper you slide into the deep hypnotic 
trance. Deeper and deeper. It is your own wish and will 
to be in this deep trance - allow yourself." 


Manfred was immediately back in a stable deep 
trance. 


"And then?" Brigitte prompted him. 


"Someone is coming down the stairs into the room. 
They don't notice me. They don't see me. He goes to Kar- 
lotta - they know each other. I know him too. It's Rich- 
ard. Karlotta takes Richard in her arms. They kiss. They 
don't notice me! That hurts me." 


"And now? What happens next?" 


"They sit down at the table and hold hands. They talk 
to each other. But don't hear what they say." 


"Why don't you hear what they say?“ 

"T'm not in the same room. Just observing." 
Manfred looked very tense. 

"What do you feel?" 


"Angry! Angry and sad." 


83 


"Why are you sad?" 


"Karlotta is gone. Everything empty. Table only there 
and the fire still blazing." 


"What are you doing?" 


"I'm looking for Karlotta all over the house. Can't find 
her. I'm outside now, looking for Karlotta. 


"So what?" 


"There are many people around me. No one is inter- 
ested in me. 


"And further?" 


"I see a big castle, up by the mountain. That's where 
I'm going." 


"And now?“ 
"The guards won't let me in! I want to go in there!" 


Full of tension, Manfred reared up his upper body. He 
tightened his arms as if he wanted to push something 
away or fight it off. He seemed to be struggling and 
groaned loudly several times. His face was distorted 
with pain and tension. 


Brigitte briefly considered whether she should make 
the return indirect. She would then have gone back with 
Manfred to the stairs and from there directly into an im- 
aginary room where Manfred could have followed the 


84 


events from the perspective of an uninvolved observer as 
a film. But she decided to stick to direct regression for 
the time being and let Manfred directly relive the life 
situation in which his jealousy had originated. She was, 
however, on her guard and always had Manfred's posi- 
tive resource, the word "racing bike", in front of her in 
order to bring Manfred, if necessary, within fractions of 
a second into an extremely pleasant emotion and thus 
into complete calm. But to stop or interrupt here now 
would have been far too bad for Manfred. There were 
strong emotions that came up here, but the boy had to 
go through it now. 


"And go on," she urged him. 


"They are stronger than me. They have lances. They 
are hitting me with the lances!" 


Manfred struggled even harder. Brigitte already had 
one hand outstretched to hold him down if necessary, 
should he work himself off the couch. 


"What happens now?" she asked him. 
"I wake up in a ditch." 


Suddenly all the tension fell away from Manfred. He 
sobbed loudly and then began to cry bitterly. The tears 
ran from his eyes, formed small rivulets on his face and 
finally gathered in his ears. 


That's good, Brigitte thought, that frees. She waited 
patiently until he had calmed down again after about a 


85 


minute. When he calmed down, she asked the next ques- 
tion: 


"What do you feel?" 
"T feel empty. I'm bleeding. Can't get up." 
"What are you doing?" 


"I pick myself up and walk through a forest. My leg 
hurts! It's bleeding! It hurts so bad!" 


"So what happens now?" 


"T come to a small house. There is an old woman there. 
She bandages my leg and gives me something to drink. 
I fall asleep." 


"And then?" 
"I feel better again. I leave the house. 
"Where are you going?“ 


"Go to my house. I have money hidden there. A bag of 
coins." 


"Go on." 
"Get it for me. Leave town." 


Manfred had become completely calm again. He was 
breathing deeply and evenly. His trance depth fluctu- 
ated a little but remained stable in the "three-beat 
range". 


86 


"And then?" continued Brigitte. 
"Come to a big city." 

"What's the name of the city?" 
"Munich." 

"And then." 


"Am blacksmith. Alone. Shoeing a horse. The owner 
of the horse comes. She gives me three pennies and 
thanks me." 


"And further — go on." 

"She looks like Karlotta. She rides away." 
"What do you feel?" 

"T'm sad." 

"Why are you sad?" 

"I'm alone." 

"What are you doing?" 

"Standing at a workbench." 

"and further, go on." 


"Don't want to live anymore. Pack my things and 
move on." 


"Where to?" 


87 


"To a small village.“ 

"Meet a woman. Get married. Maria." 

"How do you feel?" 

"Happy. I think, she’s happy as well." 

"and further." 

"We have two children. Tobias and Karlotta." 


Manfred burst into tears and Brigitte waited a mo- 
ment for him to calm down. 


"What now?" 


"Have a forge. Work a lot. Maria scolds me. Karlotta 
is ill. Big worry about Karlotta." 


Manfred faltered. 
"And then?" demanded Brigitte of him. 
"Karlotta is dead." 


Manfred began to sob again. When he had calmed 
down again, she continued to ask. 


"What happens now?" 
"T blame Maria. 
"What do you feel?“ 


"So then further? Go on." 


88 


"Start drinking. Beer. Go to a pub and get drunk. Am 
alone." 


"Are you really alone?" 
"Not really. The others don't pay any attention to me." 
"And then?" 


"Go home. Maria and Tobias are no longer there. Am 
alone." 


"And then further? Go on." 

"I'm sad." 

"What do you do?" 

"Sitting at the table and crying. Nothing happens." 
"Go forward a bit in time." 

"Am in a big meadow." 

"What are you doing?" 


"Got a horse on the lunge. I've been be-beating that. 
Am a stable boy. Take care of the horses." 


"Where are you?" 
"In a big castle." 
"What's the name of the castle?“ 


»Friedberg.“ 


89 


"Got a lot of work. There are a lot of people living 
there. Markets." 


"And further? Go on." 


"Am alone. But have a mistress. We meet secretly in 
the stable. But no one must know. Her name is Carla." 


"Why can't anyone know?" 
"She's much younger than me. 
"How old are you?" 

"Forty years." 

"So what." 


"Am not the only one for Carla. See her with the 
cook." 


At that moment Manfred's whole body tensed again. 
He clenched his hands into fists. The force with which 
he clenched his fists made his forearms tremble. 
Manfred's face betrayed the tension he was under. Now 
his whole body began to tremble as well. 


"What do you feel?“ 
"What are you doing?" 
"Beat up the cook and Carla!" 


"So what?" 


90 


"The cook is dead. He fell with the back of his head on 
a stone." 


The tension was gone from Manfred's body as quickly 
as it had come. He lay there completely relaxed again. 
He was breathing calmly and evenly. His facial expres- 
sion had suddenly taken on melancholy features. Brig- 
itte continued with her questions. 


"And what happens then?" 
"T have to leave the castle." 
"What do you do?" 


"I'm walking along a long road. Without a destina- 


tion." 
"And further." 


"There's a broken carriage. One wheel is broken. The 
coachman is alone. He can't fix the wheel." 


"What are you doing?" 
"Help him." 
"What then?" 


"May ride along out of gratitude. Two women, fine 
young women, are in the carriage." 


"Where are you going?" 


"To Munich." 


91 


"And further." 


"Visit the old smithy. There's another blacksmith 
working there. Go to the town hall." 


"Why are you going to the town hall?" 

"Want to buy something." 

"What?" 

"A house. Buy it. It's a nice house." 

"Go on." 

"It's an inn. Have employees. Don't have a wife." 
"Why don't you have a wife?" 

"Don't want wife!" 


Brigitte was convinced that she would not receive any 
more essential information during this hypnosis. She de- 
cided to end the questioning here. Besides, time was 
pressing. The experiences she had described still had to 
be worked through and the 45-minute limit was already 
within reach, as she noticed with a glance at the digital 
clock, which showed 19:28. Manfred was now lying per- 
fectly still in a stable deep trance. He was breathing 
calmly and evenly. "Now we have to step on the gas a 
bit," Brigitte said to herself and continued the hypno- 
therapy. 


92 


I will now count from one to three and when I reach 
three, you will immediately return to today's level, to- 
day, 30 November 2012. You will take the memory of 
everything you have just experienced with you to today's 
level, today, 30 November 2012. "One" - "two" - "three".“ 


"Where are you?" asked Brigitte. 
"On the stairs," replied Manfred. 
"On which step?" 
"On today's step." 


"Good," Brigitte praised. 


Develop and anchor new convictions 


Brigitte took a deep breath and took a few seconds to 
consciously let the energies of light flow into her and 
thus into Manfred's aura in deep, conscious gratitude - 
for the highest good of Manfred and thus for the highest 
good of all that is. She immediately felt that the 


93 


energetic connection between her and Manfred's aura, 
which had existed during the entire hypnosis so far, be- 
came even more intense. Manfred's energy field and her 
own resonated. Brigitte was absolutely sure that in this 
way she would now intuitively choose the right way of 
talking. It was immensely important to her that she 
guided Manfred in his trance in such a way that his sub- 
conscious could bring about the changes Manfred 
wanted. Brigitte did not want to exert any kind of influ- 
ence coming from her. No, Manfred's subconscious and 
his consciousness, which was completely uncritical in 
the state of this trance, should solve Manfred's problems 
themselves. 


"Can I say," Brigitte addressed Manfred again, "that 
Karlotta left you in another life?" 


"Yes," Manfred answered surprisingly quickly and 
clearly. 


"But, if Karlotta left you in another life, then it 
doesn't matter for your present life, does it?" 


Manfred's eyes began to roll under the closed lids. It 
took quite a while before they came to a stop again. 


"No," he replied, stretching. 


"If it's not important today that Karlotta left you, is it 
important for you to know why she left you?" 


"No," came a stretched reply from Manfred after a 
while. 


94 


"Can you adopt that for yourself? Can you adopt for 
yourself that it is completely indifferent to you today 
why Karlotta left you in an earlier life?" 


Manfred's eyes moved under the closed lids. After 
some time came a tortured "Yes". 


"Then adopt this for yourself now and anchor it 
firmly." 


"Have you adopted it for yourself?" 


"Yes," came the answer from Manfred. "Quite firmly?" 
inquired Brigitte. "Yes," replied Manfred again. "Hon- 
estly?" asked Brigitte for the third time. "Yesss," came 
Manfred's reply, almost a little annoyed. "Then it is like 
that and not otherwise. It is deeply anchored in your 
subconscious.“ 


To be sure, Brigitte asked again: "Is it important for 
you to know why Karlotta left you back then?" "No," 
came Manfred's spontaneous and very certain answer. 


"Good," Brigitte praised stretched. 


"Is it that you had an experience with Karlotta during 
your experience?" 


"Yes." 


"But isn't an experience something you learnt for 
yourself?" 


"Yes." 


95 


"But if an experience is something that you have al- 
ready learned for yourself, then you don't need to have 
that experience again, do you? Is that so?" 


"Yes." 
"Can you adopt that for yourself?" 
"Yes.“ 


"Then please adopt it for yourself now and anchor it 
firmly." 


"Have you adopted it?" 
"Yes." 

"Have you really adopted it?" 
"Yes." 

"Are you sure?" 

"Yes." 


"After all, if an experience is something you've al- 
ready learned and you don't have to have that experi- 
ence again, then you know something you didn't know 
before, is that so?" 


"Yes." 


"Then an experience you've had is always something 
positive, no matter what that experience is - is that 
right?" 


96 


"Yes." 


"If an experience is always something positive, then 
an experience cannot burden your life, can it?“ 


"No," came the answer very quickly and firmly. 


"But if an experience is something positive and the 
experiences you have already had do not burden your 
life, then you can always have new experiences, can't 
you? 


"Yes." 
"Do you have a free will?" 


"Yes." 


"If you have a free will, then you can choose the expe- 
riences you want to have, can't you?" 


Manfred's eyes rolled. "Yes," came the reply after a 
short while. 


"If an experience you've already had is always some- 
thing positive, and you have a free will, then you can 
have the experiences you want to have - is that so?“ 


"Yes." 


"But if that is so, can I say that you are free and open 
to new experiences?" 


"Yes." 


97 


"Can you adopt that for yourself?" 
"Yes." 


"Then please adopt it for yourself now and anchor it 
firmly." 


"Have you adopted it?" 
"Yes." 

"Have you really adopted it?" 
"Yes." 

"Are you sure?" 

"Yes." 


"After all, if you are free and open to have the experi- 
ences you want with your own free will, then you are 
free, aren't you?" 


"Yes.“ 
"Can you adopt that for yourself?" 
"Yes." 


"Then please adopt it for yourself now and anchor it 
firmly." 


"Have you adopted it?" 


"Yes." 


98 


"Have you really adopted it?" 
"Yes." 
"Are you sure?" 


"Yes." 


"But if you are free and have your own free will, then 
you can let go of your jealousy, can't you?" 


Manfred's eyes rolled. "Is that so?" pursued Brigit-te. 
"Yes." 


"Then just let go of your jealousy now, just let go!“ 


Manfred lay there quietly. After a few seconds he 
gave a deep, gurgling sigh. He tensed his whole body and 
gave a second deep, guttural sigh of relief and fell back 
into complete relaxation, smiling happily. 


"Have you completely let go of your jealousy?" 
"Yes," came the happy, abrupt reply. 

"Then you are completely free of jealousy, are you?" 
"Yes." 

"Can you adopt that for yourself?" 

"Yes." 


"Then please adopt it for yourself now and anchor it 
firmly." 


99 


"Have you adopted it?" 
"Yes." 

"Have you really adopted it?" 
"Yes." 

"Are you sure?" 

"Yes." 


"If everything you experience leads to an experience, 
and if an experience is always something positive that 
expands your inner knowing, can you ever fail?“ 


"No." 
"Can you adopt that for yourself?" 
"Yes." 


"Then please adopt it for yourself now and anchor it 
firmly." 


"Have you adopted it?" 
"Yes." 

"Have you really adopted it?" 
"Yes." 

"Are you sure?" 


"Yes." 


100 


"Are you a free person, using your free will to have 
the experiences you want to have?" 


"Yes.“ 


"Are all other people allowed to have the experiences 
they want to have with their free will as well?" 


"Yes." 


"And if an experience a person has with their own free 
will is always something positive, can there be blame or 
guiltiness?" 


"No." 
"Can you adopt that for yourself?" 
"Yes." 


"Then please adopt it for yourself now and anchor it 
firmly." 


"Have you adopted it?" 
"Yes." 

"Have you really adopted it?" 
"Yes." 

"Are you sure?" 


"Yes.“ 


101 


"If there is no guiltiness, can you be guilty of any- 
thing?" 


"No " 


"If you can't have guilt about anything, then I can say 
you are free from guiltiness, is that so?" 


"Yes." 
"Can you adopt that for yourself?" 
"Yes." 


"Then please adopt it for yourself now and anchor it 
firmly." 


"Have you adopted it?" 

"Yes." 

"Have you really adopted and achored it?" 
"Yes." 

"Are you sure?" 

"Yes." 


"Surely if there is no guilt and you are free from guilt, 
then every other person is free from guilt as well, is that 
so?" 


"Yes." 


"Is there anyone you want to forgive?" 


102 


Manfred's eyes rolled and it took him quite a while to 
answer. "The cook," he whispered. 


"Good, now forgive the cook for everything he has 
done to you, from the bottom of your heart." 


Manfred suddenly sobbed loudly and began to cry. 
"Why are you crying?“ 

"The cook has forgiven me," he sobbed. 

"Are you jealous?", Brigitte asked again to be sure. 
"No," Manfred smiled happily. 


"Can all people go their own self-determined way and 
have the experiences they want to have for themselves?" 


"Yes." 
"Can you adopt that for yourself?" 
"Yes." 


"Then please adopt it for yourself now and anchor it 
firmly." 


"Have you adopted and anchored it?" 
"Yes." 
"Have you really adopted it?" 


"Yes." 


103 


"Are you sure?" 
"Yes." 


"If all people can follow their own chosen path, then 
you can respect that, can't you?" 


"Yes." 


"Are you also a person who can go your own, self-cho- 
sen way: . 


"Yes." 
"Then you can respect that too, can't you?" 
"Yes." 


"In that case, can I say you respect yourself and all 
other people?" 


"Yes." 
"Can you adopt that for yourself?" 
"Yes." 


"Then please adopt it for yourself now and anchor it 
firmly." 


"Have you adopted it?" 
"Yes." 


"Have you really adopted and anchored it?" 


104 


"Yes." 
"Are you sure?" 
"Yes." 


"Is every person with their own free will allowed to 
have the experiences they want? 


"Yes." 

"Does your existence end with the end of this life?" 
Manfred shook with laughter. "No, of course not". 
Can your existence ever be over?" 

"No," Manfred snorted. 

"Can anyone else's existence ever come to an end?" 
"No," Manfred squeaked gleefully. 


"Are all humans energetically connected to each 
other?" 


"Yes of course," came Manfred's spontaneous stunned 
reply. 


"Then can you ever really be alone and forsaken?" 
Manfred snorted again. "No." 
"Can you adopt that for yourself?" 


"Yes." 


105 


"Then please adopt it for yourself now and anchor it 
firmly." 


"Have you adopted it?" 

"Yes." 

"Have you really adopted and anchored it?" 
"Yes." 

"Are you sure?" 

"Yes.“ 

"Can you let go of your fear of loss then?" 
Manfred snorted with laughter. "I don't need to." 
"Why not?" 

"Don't have any." 

"Can I say you're a kind, loving person?" 

"Yes," 

"Are you a kind, loving person?" 

"Yes." Tears of emotion ran from Manfred's eyes. 
"Can you adopt that for yourself?" 


"Yes," he sobbed. 


106 


"Then please adopt it for yourself now and anchor it 
very firmly." 


"Have you adopted and anchored it?" 
"Yes." 

"Have you really adopted it?" 

"Yes." 

"Are you sure?" 

"Yes." 


"After all, if you are a kind, loving person, then you 
are entitled to everything for your highest good and 
therefore for the highest good of all, aren't you?" 


"Yes," Manfred sobbed and he began to cry even 
harder. 


"Can you adopt that for yourself?" 
"Yes." 


"Then please adopt it for yourself now and anchor it 
firmly." 


"Have you adopted it?" 
"Yes." 
"Have you really adopted it?" 


"Yes." 


107 


"Are you sure?" 
"Yes." 


"If you are entitled to everything for your highest 
good and thus for the highest good of all, then you are 
also entitled to perfect health, aren't you?" 


"Yes," Manfred sobbed. 


"Then adopt this perfect health for yourself now. Let 
it flow, down to the smallest cell of your entire body. Just 
let it flow." 


Manfred breathed deeply. "Just let it flow, down to 
the smallest cell of your entire body. Just adopt perfect 
health. Just let it flow." Manfred began to smile bliss- 
fully. 


"Have you adopted and embraced perfect health for 
yourself? 


"Yes.“ 
"Can you adopt that for yourself?" 
"Yes." 


"Then please adopt it for yourself now and anchor it 
firmly." 


"Have you adopted it?" 


"Yes." 


108 


"Have you really adopted it?" 
"Yes." 

"Are you sure?" 

"Yes." 


Manfred lay on the couch smiling and completely re- 
laxed. 


"Enjoy, just enjoy.“ 


The hypnosis exit 


Brigitte looked at the digital clock. The hypnosis had 
lasted one hour and seven minutes. Manfred lay in front 
of her, smiling happily. His trance deepened even more 
at that moment, as she could see from his half-open eye- 
lids. She let him enjoy this state for a little moment and 
waited patiently, not taking her eyes or his breathing 


109 


out of her sight for a second. All at once the eyelids 
opened completely and Manfred looked rigidly at the 
ceiling in a deep trance. 


I'll give him one more minute, thought the hypnother- 
apist. She had had tears of emotion in her eyes at many 
points during the hypnosis. Now, too, she wiped away a 
few tears and enjoyed Manfred's happy smile. After a 
short while, she knew that it was now high time to dis- 
solve the hypnosis. 


"Please close your eyes". 


When she addressed him, Manfred's eyelids closed. 


"T will now count from one to five and when I reach 
five, you will open your eyes. Then you will be fully 
awake, concentrated and oriented in the here and now, 
today, 30 November 2012, in perfect health of body, 
mind and soul.“ 


"One." - Whenever I touch you on the forehead during 
any hypnosis, you immediately slip back into the same 
deep hypnotic trance you are in now." 


"Two." - "You can remember every detail of this hyp- 
nosis at any time you wish." 


"Three." - "Pulse, blood pressure and all your bodily 
functions are assuming optimal levels for you." 


110 


Brigitte waited a moment to allow Manfred's bodily 
functions to adjust to the impending dissolution of hyp- 
nosis. 


"Four." - "You're getting more awake, more awake, 
more awake. Maybe you'll loll a little or move your hands 
or your feet a little. Just as you feel comfortable. And 
you become more and more awake." 


After a short while, Manfred began to move his hands 
and feet and he loll about a little. 


"Five," Brigitte said firmly. 


Manfred opened his eyes, breathed deeply and looked 
at Brigitte for a moment. Then he looked fixedly at the 
ceiling and closed his eyes. Tears were running and 
Brigitte waited patiently until he had collected himself. 
Tears of emotion ran down her face too. 


Brigitte rolled back a little on her stool and leaned 
back relaxed against the wall of shelves that stood 
alongside, the couch against the wall. "7:57 p.m. - end," 
she noted on her writing board. 


One hour and ten minutes, she thought, and there-of 
an hour in a deep trance. She knew that Manfred had 
just performed Herculean feats. Surely Manfred would 
be very thirsty now and would also have a great craving 
for sugar. She briefly considered offering him a glass of 
water and some of the glucose that was always ready. 


111 


But then she decided against it. No, she didn't want to 
disturb Manfred's thoughts and feelings. Not now. 


After a good ten minutes, Manfred exhaled deeply 
and liberated. "Madness," he groaned. Brigitte sat next 
to him. "Just lie still for a moment." Manfred closed his 
eyes again and smiled happily. 


She looked at Manfred as he lay still on the couch 
with his eyes closed. She knew Manfred was wide awake 
but at the same time overwhelmed by what he had just 
experienced. 


She also knew that Manfred was in the process of pro- 
cessing his almost unbelievable experiences in hypnosis 
with his awake daytime consciousness. Eventually he 
would be able to remember every detail of this hypnosis. 
And what Manfred had just experienced with all his 
emotions in a completely real way had to be a pure shock 
for his rationally thinking consciousness. 


All this could not exist from the point of view of his 
consciousness, ie. his "ego". On the other hand, 
Manfred's consciousness had experienced everything 
that came up from the unconscious during hypnosis in 
full live. Even if it had taken the role of a passive, unin- 
terested observer in the trance, Manfred's consciousness 
had nevertheless noticed and stored every detail. And 
now it stood there with its entire world view of learned 
knowledge and had to accept something as real that it 
had never thought possible. "He needs a few minutes of 


112 


silence for that, and Manfred deserves it," Brigitte 
thought patiently. 


With a deep breath, Manfred opened his eyes and 
looked up at the ceiling. "Are you all right?", Brigitte ad- 
dressed him. Manfred turned his head to the side and 
looked at Brigitte. He just smiled happily and nodded. 
Then Manfred straightened up. "Wait, not quite so fast, 
I'll take the blanket off first." Saying that, Brigitte took 
away the woolen blanket and the vein pillow and put the 
things on the armchair next to the couch. She wanted to 
have both hands free to support Manfred in case he got 
dizzy. Manfred sat up and wanted to get up immedi- 
ately. "Please remain seated for a moment until your cir- 
culation has stabilized," Brigitte urged him. "Would you 
like a glass of water?" "With pleasure," Manfred replied. 
He propped himself up on the couch with both hands. 
Brigitte handed him the water and then held out a bowl 
of sweets. Manfred gratefully took a chocolate bar and 
then another while Brigitte refilled his water. "Are you 
all right?" she asked. "Yes, I'm fine, now I can get up". 
Manfred let himself slide off the couch and sat down in 
the armchair to put on his shoes. 


113 


The follow-up discussion 


"Now let's sit down next door for a moment and have 
another cup of coffee in peace, what do you think?" 
Manfred just nodded wordlessly and followed her. "Do 
you want to talk about it, or do you still have questions 
about what happened during the hypnosis?" Manfred 
shook his head, "That was insane!" And after a long 
pause he continued, "Please don't be angry with me, but 


114 


I have to let that sink in now. That was sheer madness!" 
"Good, then I'll quickly make us a fresh coffee. Then you 
can relax a little in the meantime." 


Brigitte got up and left the room. She knew that 
Manfred had a lot to process right now and didn't want 
to disturb him at all. On the other hand, she had to be 
absolutely sure that he was fully awake and responsive 
again before he got into his car. So now she wanted to 
buy some time. She went upstairs, waited ten minutes 
and then came back with a pot of fresh coffee. 


Manfred sat completely relaxed and lost in thought in 
his armchair, his hands clasped behind his head. He had 
made himself comfortable and tilted the backrest back. 
"I didn't know you could adjust the backrest," he re- 
marked when Brigitte came in. "Good, isn't it?" smiled 
Brigitte with satisfaction as she poured the coffee. This 
was a good sign for her that Manfred was fully back. 
"When we started energetic hypnosis ten years ago, we 
bought twelve of them. At that time, we were still in our 
old rooms. Everything was much smaller, but also very 
cozy." "Were you also in Monchengladbach before?", 
Manfred wanted to know. "Good," thought Brigitte, "it's 
back in full force." "Yes, first we were on "Odenkirchener 
StraBe", then at the "Eickesmtihle" and when that also 
became too small again, we moved here. That was four 
years ago now." Manfred felt his right thigh. "The leg 
feels quite different, somehow" - he searched for the 
right words - "somehow whole". "I guess it always was, 
but just not to your subconscious," Brigitte noted. "That 


115 


has changed now, and your phantom pain should be 
gone with it. Why don't you get in touch and let me know 
how you are?" 


"When do you want me to come back?" asked 
Manfred. "It's best if you just let your hypnosis work for 
now and if you feel the need to come back, then just call 
me and we'll make another appointment. But please, not 
because of your jealousy," Brigitte laughed. Manfred 
looked at her puzzled. "Don't I need a follow-up appoint- 
ment?" Brigitte smiled, "Fine with me, but what for? 
Your subconscious has firmly accepted and deeply an- 
chored everything it worked out for itself in hypnosis. I 
have cross-checked that. And that should put an end to 
your problems. In any case, your subconscious mind is 
now through with it.“ 


Manfred looked at her in disbelief. He felt really 
good, completely liberated and totally free. Worried, he 
asked: "Will the effect last now? Doesn't it have to be re- 
peated?" "No," Brigitte explained, "once your subcon- 
scious has firmly anchored something, you don't have a 
trace of a chance to change it with your awake conscious- 
ness. The subconscious is a million times faster than 
your conscious. Think of the coffee with the taste of salt!" 
Manfred felt inwardly liberated and filled with a deep, 
inner feeling of happiness that he couldn't put into 
words - he didn't have to. "I'll go home now, then." "You 
do that," Brigitte agreed with him, "and thank you for 
your trust!" She accompanied Manfred to the door. 
When he had put on his jacket, he looked at Briitte: 


116 


"May I give you a hug and a squeeze?" Manfred hugged 
Brigitte warmly and said goodbye. When he had got into 
his car, he noticed that his leg had not hurt at all when 
he got in, as it usually had. Thoughtful and still gripped, 
he started the engine. 


(Note: This hypnosis was carried out and recorded ex- 
actly as it 1s described here - from the introduction to the 
release!) 


Kpilogue 


Two weeks later, Manfred called. He was completely 
happy. The only worry he had now was: "Does it last? 
Don't you have to repeat the hypnosis from time to 
time?" "No," Brigitte laughed, "You anchored everything 
deeply and firmly in your subconscious during the hyp- 
nosis. That will last all your life now, don't worry! How 
are you then?" 


117 


"I'm fine. The jealousy is completely gone. And my 
blood pressure values have also improved. I feel really 
good! All this is still completely incomprehensible to me. 
And something else is completely incomprehensible to 
me," he added joyfully. "After my hypnosis, I looked at 
your website. I know your colleague from before. Ralf 
and I have worked together on a few projects, but I didn't 
know that he was also a hypnotherapist. It almost 
knocked me off my feet how small the world is. If I had 
known that, I would have come to you much earlier!" 


"I also read the testimonials on your website. I would 
also like to write you a field report." "That's great," Brig- 
itte said happily, "we'll be happy to publish it anony- 
mously on our website. 


That same evening Manfred sent the following email: 
Dear Brigitte and Ralf, 


For me as an engineer, the world of numbers, laws 
and methods was also my world. Unfortunately, my 
world also included such unpleasant things as jealousy, 
low self-esteem, envy of things that others have 
achieved, etc. Jealousy, in particular, managed to ruin 
my lite and also my life. Especially jealousy managed to 
spoil my lite and that of my wite. 


Even as a little boy I was jealous. So, what could be 
more obvious than being neglected by parents as a smal] 
child, the "inner child" not feeling loved, etc.? A therapist 
who works in depth psychology gave me little hope; the 


118 


estimated duration of therapy was about a year, but 
more likely longer. I could already see my marriage go- 
ing down the drain, because my wife’s nerves were also 
beginning to tray. 


Then I came to you by chance and in no time at all I 
was sitting with you, dear Brigitte, for a first session. 


In three hours of preliminary talks I told you about 
my problems and wishes. And then came the moment of 
the hypnosis session, 1t was unbelievable. It was not in 
my childhood that I was hurt, but in a previous lite. To 
be more precise, in 1719, what please: 1719 ??? That's 
impossible! There was circumstantial evidence, which of 
course I was able to google and which confirmed my 
statements. 


But the greatest thing was that I felt as if I had been 
reborn. The jealousy gone, the worries gone - it's all so 
simple. You have made me and my wife the happiest of 
people, we are infinitely grateful. I know that this mes- 
sage will be edited in such a way that it will not be pos- 
sible to deduce my identity. However, I would like to ex- 
pressly allow you to pass on my e-mail address to anyone 
who 1s interested. I would also be happy to tell others my 
story. 


If I had known how you could help me, I would have 
sought you out twenty years ago. 


Thanks again for everything. 


119 


Mantred 


Shortly before Christmas, Manfred called again. "My 
cardiologist no longer understands the world," he an- 
nounced, beaming with joy. "Since I've been with you, 
I've been around three times with a continuous ECG. My 
blood pressure is still slightly high at 140/90, but I have- 
n't needed any medication for a fortnight. That is abso- 
lutely fantastic. It's so fantastic that I still can't believe 
it myself. And that's despite the fact that I've experi- 
enced it for real myself." 


"You already explained a lot to me," he added, "during 
our conversation before the hypnosis. But I still have one 
request." "And what is that?" asked Brigitte. "I have ex- 
perienced a regression to a previous life for real. I would 
never have thought such a thing possible. And now I 
would like to know more about it. I would like to know 
what is really reality. I want to understand what I expe- 
rienced in hypnosis." 


"Then we'd better sit down together for a day and then 
we'll answer all your questions as best we can. The best 
time would be between Christmas and New Year's Eve. 
That's when things are a bit quieter and we'll take all 
the time we need," Brigitte spontaneously suggested. 
"Would that be all right with you?" "Of course," Manfred 
replied, "I'm looking forward to it.“ 


120 


121 


Part 2 


What is reality really? 


122 


A cosy get-together 


On Friday, 28 December 2012, the time had finally 
come. When Manfred pressed the bell button, he felt no 
nervousness in him. "Very different from the first time," 
he thought. He was looking forward to the conversation. 
Now it was like visiting friends for him. 


"Hello Manfred," Brigitte's voice sounded from the in- 
tercom and at the same time the door opener buzzed. 
When Manfred entered, Brigitte met him on the stairs. 
"Good morning Manfred, good to see you!" she greeted 
him warmly and held out both arms. He hugged her in 
greeting and then took off his jacket. "Today we're going 
upstairs to the seminar room," she said as she stowed 
the jacket in the wardrobe. "Ralf will be here soon too." 
They went up the stairs together and entered the semi- 
nar room, which was kept in exactly the same style as 
the rooms Manfred already knew. "Please take a seat 
wherever you like." At that moment Ralf came in. "Hello 
Manfred," he called joyfully. "Hello Ralf," Manfred 
greeted him warmly as they shook hands. They sat down 
in the comfortable armchairs and were immediately en- 
grossed in a conversation about a construction project 
they had both worked on together. Manfred had been the 
site manager at the time and Ralf had taken over the 
project management for the extensive steel construction 
work that had to be carried out for the building project. 
Brigitte poured coffee and was amazed that the two 
knew each other so well. 


124 


Manfred turned to Ralf. "I knew that you were an en- 
gineer. But you never mentioned that you are also a hyp- 
notherapist." "One has nothing to do with the other," 
Ralf explained. "When I work as an engineer, I do it pro- 
fessionally and I don't talk about hypnosis. And cer- 
tainly not about past lives," he added. "And when I work 
here as a hypnotherapist or conduct seminars together 
with Brigitte, I don't tell anything about construction 
projects. Those are completely different worlds that you 
simply shouldn't mix." 


After a good quarter of an hour, they got down to the 
real topic: "What would you like to know more about, 
Manfred? 


"All that I experienced during hypnosis is so incom- 
prehensible to me that I can't explain it. And yet I would 
like to be able to understand and comprehend it. How 
can I find myself so real in a past life? I found Schloss 
Friedberg on the internet. It is actually near Munich. 
And when I saw the pictures on the internet, everything 
was completely familiar to me, as if I had been there be- 
fore. Before the hypnosis I had never heard of Friedberg. 
I'm completely sure of that. And why can I change my 
whole life with a single hypnosis - and from a previous 
life at that? I'm fine now, but I'd love to know how it's all 
connected. And then on top of that..." "Wait a minute," 
Ralf interrupted him, "not so much at once. Maybe we 
should talk about a few basic considerations first and 
then we'll feel our way forward step by step. Do you 
agree?" Manfred nodded, "Of course!“ 


125 


The trigger of change 


126 


"If you're interested," Ralf grinned, "I'd be happy to 
tell you first how I, as an engineer, came to be involved 
with psychic energy work and hypnosis." "Oh yes," 
Manfred looked at him eagerly. "I'm very interested in 
that." "I can imagine that," Ralf laughed and he began 
to tell: 


"After my mechanical engineering studies, I started 
working in the maintenance department of a large com- 
pany in Ratingen, which is part of a global electrical cor- 
poration. I enjoyed the work and after four years I was 
head of the entire plant maintenance. During this time, 
I often had to deal with a woman, also an engineer. Let's 
call her Sabrina. We liked each other and somehow had 
a connection, but nothing more. After all, I was married 
and she was about to get married. 


When I was thirty, I went into business for myself 
and founded my own specialist maintenance company 
together with my father. We started in a garage," Ralf 
laughed. "Then we added steel construction and after 
three years we built our own large production hall in 
Grevenbroich. Two years later, we then took over the en- 
tire maintenance department of my former employer. 
Business was good and I was already leading quite a lux- 
urious life, including expensive cars and a large motor 
yacht. But I could hardly enjoy the luxury, because I al- 
ways worked late into the night. 


Then my former employer decided to build a new fac- 
tory in Ratingen, which was to be much smaller than the 


127 


old one. In this context, we then took over more than one 
hundred employees and large parts of the machinery 
with our company. We then also built a new, large fac- 
tory in Neuss. At that time, we had two hundred and 
fifty employees at three locations. We were doing well 
economically, and I was respected everywhere as a suc- 
cessful entrepreneur, which I was after all. However, at 
that time my second marriage had already failed. 


Most outsiders must have envied me at the time, but 
deep down inside I was miserable, and had been for all 
those years. Throughout this time, my relationship with 
Sabrina had deepened and deepened until I loved her 
dearly - an unrequited love, mind you. Throughout the 
years we saw each other almost daily and an unshakea- 
ble bond of trust built up between us. Today, from a dis- 
tance, I can best describe this sizzling game that Sabrina 
and I played with each other for almost sixteen years 
like this: She was a master at attracting me and then 
keeping me at a distance. And for me, it was the "princi- 
ple of hope" that prevented me from ending this cruel 
game. I remember exactly how my girlfriend at the time, 
Monika, summed it up precisely in two sentences when 
we were talking about Sabrina." "She enhances herself 
with it. She has you by the thread and sometimes she 
pulls it." "I'm not hanging on anyone's thread," I had re- 
plied defiantly at the time. Today I know that Monika 
was right. Love is blind. 


But not that blind, because at least I tried to "break 
out". Sabrina's marriage had also failed, and she had 


128 


bought a house in Ratingen. We both lived alone and 
continued our game unchanged. From my rational con- 
sciousness it was perfectly clear to me that I had to end 
this unfair game as soon as possible. Only my subcon- 
scious held on to this idolatrous love. I was fully aware 
that I had to have a screw loose to go along with some- 
thing like this. So I made an appointment with a psycho- 
therapist in Dtsseldorf in the hope that he would 
tighten the screw again. Then I would be free again and 
be able to enjoy my life. The psychotherapist suggested 
talk therapy and explained that a psychotherapeutic 
treatment would last forty-five minutes - anything else 
would be too much for the patient. I, however, wanted 
quick success and so I asked him to schedule two- or 
three-hour appointments. As a result, I told the psycho- 
therapist my whole life story during some of these ap- 
pointments. I had fervently hoped that he could free me 
from my love for Sabrina. And the best thing was: every 
time I came back from such an appointment, Sabrina 
took me in her arms, looked at me compassionately and 
asked: "Did you have a hard session?" After the third 
session, the therapist had explained to me that, from his 
point of view, I did not need psychotherapeutic treat- 
ment. Instead, he suggested making further appoint- 
ments in the form of couples therapy together with Sa- 
brina. He wanted to ask his wife, who was also a psycho- 
therapist, to take part in these talks.“ 


Ralf took a short break and poured himself a cup of 
coffee. Brigitte and Manfred had been listening atten- 
tively and did not want to interrupt him. 


129 


"When Sabrina heard that she was to come to the psy- 
chotherapist," he continued, "she had vehemently re- 
fused at first, but then finally agreed. There were two 
such conversations, which were very emotional at times. 
The psychotherapists were surprised to discover that 
Sabrina and I were arguing like an old married couple 
who had been married for twenty years. In each of these 
conversations we had decided together that Sabrina and 
I wanted to avoid each other as much as possible. But as 
we walked down the broad wooden stairs of the patrician 
house together, Sabrina had already taken my hand 
again downstairs and said, "Come on, let's go for coffee." 
We then strolled hand in hand along the street. Every 
time we passed a psychotherapeutic practice, she 
pointed to the sign and laughed: "Look, here's another 
one. What do you want with that psychiatrist? He 
doesn't stand a chance against you. When I looked at her 
uncomprehendingly and asked her if she could imagine 
that I had hoped for help from the psychiatrist, she only 
said: "That's no use" and put her arm around me. So we 
continued our game together unchanged. The subcon- 
scious is stronger than all reason after all. 


When I cancelled the next appointment, I had the 
psychotherapist's wife on the phone. She expressed full 
understanding for the cancellation and asked me: "Mr 
Mooren, what do you want with this neurotic goat? The 
two psychotherapists had done their best with a highly 
professional interview and were now visibly disap- 
pointed. But I was very grateful to them. In this way I 
had been able to face the situation concretely at least 


130 


once. If I had known about the possibility of hypnosis 
back then, my life would certainly have been very differ- 
ent," Ralf added thoughtfully. 


About two years later, my main customer, on whom 
we were more than ninety percent dependent, began to 
break the existing contracts that granted us long-term 
supply rights. When I discussed this with the company's 
managing director, invoices were paid late, so that in a 
very short time we were short about three million euros 
in the till. As a result, I had the factory gate closed and 
no more trucks were allowed to leave the yard. The man- 
aging director called me two days later and demanded 
compliance with the contract and delivery. I then ex- 
plained to him that I would not be able to produce any 
more given the high level of outstanding orders. But the 
moment he would pay his bills, I could produce again 
immediately. That same afternoon, the three million 
were in my account and the trucks were rolling again. 


Three months later, I was abruptly told that they 
would stop their own production completely for three 
months and would therefore not need any more deliver- 
ies of goods during that time. 


In fulfilment of my legal duties as managing director, 
I had to file for insolvency for the entire group of compa- 
nies three months later. I had lost everything in one fell 
swoop. And the problem with Sabrina was solved by it- 
self another six months later: she had a new boyfriend." 


131 


"Phew," said Manfred, "then you didn't have an easy 
life either." "I think it had to happen that way. I made a 
lot of mistakes back then, but I also learned from them. 
The biggest mistake was to try to solve everything out of 
my consciousness, that is, with my analytical mind. Just 
like an engineer does," Ralf laughed. "If I had listened to 
my intuition and not suppressed it, I would certainly 
have been spared a lot. Two years before the insolvency, 
I could have sold the entire company to a group for a 
high, two-figure millions sum. The contracts were al- 
ready being prepared, but then I rejected the purchase 
offer. As strange as it may sound," Ralf continued, "from 
today's point of view I am glad that everything turned 
out this way. I'm never angry with anyone and don't re- 
gret a single bit what I lost back then. On the contrary, 
new perspectives opened up for me and [| think I live 
much more consciously and contentedly today than I did 
back then. And if you look around here today, I'm not 
living too badly," Ralf smiled. 


The interim balance of life 


Manfred looked at Ralf sympathetically. "How long 
has it all been now?" he asked. "Over ten years," Ralf 
answered. "And how did you deal with all that?" 
Manfred wanted to know. "It must have all been terrible 
for you." "It was," Ralf replied. "It was something like a 


132 


total breakdown. But every ending also offers the chance 
for a completely new beginning. 


As you can imagine, I was behind my company with 
heart and soul. I had put everything I had into the com- 
pany to avert insolvency. I had even given my ship as 
collateral shortly before. With the insolvency, every- 
thing was gone. 


But that was not the worst thing. The worst thing for 
me was the feeling of having failed. In retrospect, I had 
no chance at all to react in the short time in which all 
this happened. When a quarterly turnover suddenly 
drops, you have practically no chance, especially if you 
had previously taken on staff with recognition of previ- 
ous employment. 


The interesting thing was that people who had previ- 
ously courted me suddenly mutated into self-appointed 
experts in business management. And who then criti- 
cized mine as a matter of course. Even more interesting 
for me, however, was the fact that people I had not no- 
ticed before suddenly stood up and encouraged me. And 
then there was the coverage on television, radio and in 
the press. Not that I had anything against the reports as 
such, because they were factual and impeccable. But 
when you get in your car in the morning and the news- 
reader announces that your company is in trouble, it's 
not exactly pleasant. And then there were the politicians 
who put themselves in the limelight to boost their poll 
ratings. No, it was all pretty stressful. 


133 


But what really threw me off course was the sudden 
end of my inglorious relationship with Sabrina, which 
had never really been one, but had torn a deep wound.“ 


"T remember it," Ralf continued, "as if it were yester- 
day. I was sitting in my rocking chair, right under a sky- 
light, looking at the starry sky. I was downright shocked, 
incapable of any emotion. It was really a complete state 
of shock. I don't know how long I sat there like that, but 
suddenly my thoughts began to flow again. 


I thought about my problems, which seemed to be ab- 
solutely overwhelming for me in this situation. I knew 
that I had to accept Sabrina's decision and would of 
course do so. After all, she was a free person. But I would 
have liked to hear about this new development from her 
myself and not from her parents. So, I decided to with- 
draw from her completely and lick my wounds. Then the 
thoughts of bankruptcy came up again. It would cost 
jobs. If the company was restructured, it could continue 
for a large part of the staff. A potential investor would 
be truly envious. He would get the company at a bargain 
price and all the employees would receive new contracts 
- without recognition of previous employment, of course. 
And what about the employees who would lose their 
jobs? They would get their full salary for three months 
and then unemployment benefits. But then they would 
have to look for a new job. Everything was always talk- 
ing about the poor employees, but in the light of day, the 
people were clearly better off than I was. 


134 


Then I began to look at my problems from a greater 
distance. In the towns of Grevenbroich, Neuss and Rat- 
ingen, there were certainly people who now had a prob- 
lem. Then I looked at the situation from a greater dis- 
tance, more precisely, from Hamburg. There might be 
one or two suppliers here who would now have a loss of 
turnover. But no one here had a problem with insol- 
vency. Then I went even further and looked from China 
at the situation that was bothering me so much. No, the 
Chinese would certainly not have a problem with this. 


Absorbed, I looked up at the clear starry sky and fixed 
on a brightly shining star. If this star is five hundred 
light years away, then the light that is sparkling to- 
wards me right now has taken five hundred years to 
reach the earth. That means, I thought to myself, that 
the star that is shining so brightly right now may not 
even exist today. But that also means that if I were to 
mentally go to this star now, I would then see the earth 
as it was five hundred years ago. Then there would be 
no problem. 


Then I noticed how I began to think about my life. I 
asked myself what I would have changed through my life 
if it had ended that second. What would I take with me? 
No, of course nothing material. In this respect, I couldn't 
care less about the material loss. But there had to be 
something else. There had to be something that would 
remain. Something that would have changed because I 
had lived. The first thing that came to mind was my chil- 
dren. I have three children from two marriages: Marc, 


135 


Kyra and Alina. The children wouldn't be there if I had- 
n't lived. Sure, I was far from being a good father, but I 
was always there when I was needed. At least that's how 
I see it. The children, who have grown up in the mean- 
time by the way, may see it differently at one point or 
another. Marc and Kyra are studying, and Alina is still 
in the upper school of the Gymnasium. Maybe they can 
still achieve a lot in their lives. That is what I wish for. 


Then I thought about everything else I might have 
done in my life. Surely there would be people who would 
now be in trouble because of the loss of their jobs. But 
then I remembered that I had created those jobs in the 
first place. So I thought about the meaning of my life all 
night. In the end, I came to the conclusion that I live this 
life to make a difference, to change something. I am sure 
that this is true for every human being. Everyone in the 
place where they are. And the most important thing I 
learned that night is that everyone is responsible for 
their own life and how they live it. This responsibility 
cannot be taken away from any adult person, even if it 
is expected. That night I resolved to learn as much as I 
could about life. I wanted to understand, bit by bit, more 
and more. And then I started to look into what is usually 
called "borderline sciences". Before that, however, I re- 
freshed my knowledge of physics and quantum physics, 
which had become dusty in the meantime." 


Brigitte and Manfred had listened to Ralf the whole 
time without interrupting him once. "And how did you 


136 


deal with this situation with Sabrina?" asked Manfred 
quietly. 


Ralf took a thoughtful sip of coffee. "The state of 
shock, I can't describe it any other way, lasted for five 
months. During this time, I was like apathetic. At work, 
I had to force myself with unbelievable strength to con- 
centrate on one thing. In the meantime, I was working 
as a freelance engineer, so I could manage my work to 
some extent. But when I had concentrated for an hour, I 
had to go out somewhere in the forest. There I would 
think about what I wanted to do and when I was feeling 
better, I would go back to work. After all, I had no finan- 
cial reserves left and I had to support my two families. 
When these five months, during which I was incapable 
of any emotion, were over, the shock suddenly dissi- 
pated. To be precise, I went into a quiet room and cried 
for three days straight. After that, things got better. The 
unnatural rigidity had disappeared. But I was still very 
sad for a long time and very often. After a year, things 
got much better, but it took about five years to come to 
terms with everything. But this state of mourning also 
had something good: I devoted every free minute to ex- 
ploring life." "Did you see the woman again after that?" 
asked Manfred. "A few more times in the following 
years, because we still had one or two things to do on 
business. We were able to talk to each other in a nice 
and friendly way and otherwise I kept my distance. To- 
day, fortunately, this chapter is completely closed.“ 


137 


Energy work - the intuitive reconnection 


"After psychotherapy didn't work back then, I started 
looking for alternative methods. Then a colleague told 
me he had taken Reiki courses and since then he was 
feeling much better." Manfred listened up. "What is 
Reiki?" he inquired. "Something like healing through 
the laying on of hands," Ralf explained. "Reiki is a Far 
Eastern healing art based on consciously letting the uni- 
versal energy, with which you are always connected, 
flow into you in a grateful attitude and passing it on 
through your hands to the person you are treating. Of 


138 


course, you can also treat yourself with it." "And that 
works?" asked Manfred. "Yes, it even works very well," 
Ralf explained. "However, the practice of Reiki accord- 
ing to Doctor Usui involves a lot of effort. When you take 
Reiki courses, you learn a total of four Reiki symbols, 
which consist of Japanese characters. You have to draw 
them mentally in the right order until they become sec- 
ond nature. Then you practice the correct hand position 
and the treatment positions, learn the Reiki rules of life 
and at the end of each Reiki degree you receive an initi- 
ation, a so-called introduction, which the Reiki master 
then performs on you." "Sounds complicated," Manfred 
remarked. 


"It is," Brigitte agreed. "It was my introduction to en- 
ergy work and from that point of view it was good. It 
even went so far that when I started fifteen years ago, I 
sewed the Reiki symbols onto silk as patchwork - works. 
In the course of time and the practical work with Reiki, 
I then experienced that all this fuss only limits me. To- 
day I simply ask for all the energies of light and let my- 
self be guided intuitively. This way I don't limit myself 
to Reiki and I'm not distracted from the essentials by 
any rigid rituals. What was really important, however, 
were the initiations. Through this I have become very 
open to the perception of these energies and of course 
also to working with them," she explained. 


"Did you also attend such Reiki courses?" asked 
Manfred. "Yes," Ralf answered, "that was also my intro- 
duction to energy work, just like Brigitte. The good thing 


139 


about it," Ralf continued, "was that here, away from the 
usual daily work, you could concentrate on the questions 
of life and being. The thing I liked about it was the fact 
that every person is accepted exactly as they are. So 
there is no form of any doctrine and the free will of an- 
other is absolutely respected. When Brigitte and I met 
at a spiritual seminar around this time, we were both 
already Reiki Masters and teachers. At that time we had 
decided to conduct Reiki seminars ourselves in Brigitte's 
practice at that time. Step by step, based on our experi- 
ences, we threw off all the ballast that we thought was 
superfluous and developed our own method, which we 
believe is much simpler and more comprehensive. In any 
case, it is highly effective," he added. 


"Who attends such energy work seminars or spiritual 
seminars then?" inquired Manfred. "Often they are peo- 
ple who have had some kind of drastic experience in 
their lives," Brigitte explained. "So, an experience like 
the one Ralf just described," she continued. "There are 
as many such events as there are people in this world. 
As a rule, these individual experiences are those that 
have led to a life crisis in some form or other, that is, 
they have been a great burden. Such key experiences of- 
ten lead to the desire to better understand life and the 
whole of human existence. This was also the trigger for 
Ralf. 


Of course, many health professionals also want to fa- 
miliarize themselves with the method of energy work 
and apply it in their own practice, often in addition to 


140 


other methods of treatment." "And what is this universal 
energy you speak of in connection with your energy 
work?" asked Manfred with interest. "At this point we 
should go a little further and first deal with physics," 
suggested Ralf. 


What do we actually consist of? 


"We are both engineers, Manfred," Ralf noted. "That 
means that at least during our studies we had to acquire 
a healthy half-knowledge of exact sciences, for example 
mathematics, physics, chemistry or technical mechan- 
ics." "Oh yes," said Manfred. "And thermodynamics," he 
added. "That was always called thermodramatics in our 
school." 


"And with all these sciences, only one thing counts, 
namely the experiment," Ralf continued. "If I can ob- 
serve or measure something in an experiment and if I 
can then reproduce it, then I can say that what I have 
observed or measured is real. Mathematical proof is also 


141 


possible, of course, but there's nothing like experimen- 
tation." "That's right," Manfred agreed with him. 


"Then let's just look at matter. That is, what every- 
thing is made of, every stone, every plant, every animal 
and, of course, every human being," Ralf added. "Accord- 
ing to what we have learned, everything is made of at- 
oms, which in turn are combined to form molecules," 
Manfred explained. 


"That's right, the term "atom" was coined in this con- 
text sometime around 400 BC by the Greek philosopher 
Democritus. Atom means something like "indivisible". 
Democritus therefore assumed that matter consists of 
tiny, solid individual pieces. So, if I took a hammer and 
smashed this cup, I would only have to hit the shards 
long enough until I got a fine dust consisting of atoms. 
According to Democritus, these atoms would then no 
longer be divisible. And that is exactly what the entire 
civilized world believed for over 2000 years. And woe be- 
tide anyone who claimed otherwise." Ralf took a sip of 
coffee. 


"In 1911, Ernest Rutherford, in his famous scattering 
experiment, bombarded a wafer-thin gold foil with alpha 
particles, i.e. radioactive radiation. You could also say 
that the foil was x-rayed. The result was that the gold 
foil was penetrated almost unhindered by the radiation. 
So, there was no longer any question of solid atoms. 


Nils Bohr developed his atomic model in 1913. To do 
this, he combined the studies of quantum physics made 


142 


by Max Planck and Albert Einstein with the laws of clas- 
sical physics. Finally, in 1922, he developed the "Peri- 
odic Table of the Elements", in which the chemical ele- 
ments are listed according to their mass number and 
their properties. To explain the atomic structure, Bohr 
developed a shell model here, which we were all con- 
fronted with in chemistry class at one time or another." 


"Yes," Manfred agreed, "according to this, an atom 
consists of an atomic nucleus and an electron shell. In 
the atomic nucleus there are protons and neutrons, 1.e. 
infinitely small particles that clump closely together. 
And the shell consists of electrons, which whiz around 
the atomic nucleus at ape-like speeds at different inter- 
vals, the so-called shells. At the same time, the electrons 
still revolve around themselves. So, they still have spe- 
cific properties themselves, namely their so-called spin." 


"Exactly," Ralf replied, "then let's just imagine that. 
The particles we are talking about here are infinitely 
small - so small that you can't see them with even the 
best electron microscope. These proportions are simply 
inconceivable to us as humans. But we can calculate 
with the numbers. A proton has a diameter of 


0,000.000.000.000.000.17 Meters 


and an electron is ten thousand times smaller. We 
simply can't imagine anything pictorially under such di- 
mensions." 


143 


"I never thought of it that way," Manfred remarked 
in amazement. "I've never thought about imagining an 
electron or a proton in its true size." 


"I only started thinking about this when I began to 
work with energy," said Ralf. "It was simply important 
to me to find sensible and rationally comprehensible ap- 
proaches to neatly explain what we do here every day. 
And that is why I have enlarged such an atom to scale 
once, so that we can at least get a vague idea of what 
orders of magnitude we are actually talking about here. 
In doing so, I have found that even a scaled-up model is 
very difficult to imagine. This is due to the tininess of 
the electron and the comparatively huge distance be- 
tween electron and proton. That's why my model had to 
be very large: It is our planet earth," Ralf grinned. 


"For our model, let's take the smallest and simplest 
atom there is, namely a hydrogen atom," Ralf began to 
explain his scale model." "Yes, that has only one proton 
and one electron," Manfred agreed. 


"And if you now imagine the proton as a sphere with 
a diameter of two hundred meters, positioned exactly at 
the center of the earth, and then the electron the size of 
a walnut, then our scaled-up atomic model is already 
complete. In other words: A walnut flies at high speed 
over the entire surface of the earth and orbits the sphere 
at the center of the earth. The whole earth forms the 
shell of our atom. But only because it is "apparently" 
formed by the walnut. 


144 


Manfred looked incredulous. "Are you sure about 
that?" he asked. "Pretty sure," Ralf replied. "I enlarged 
the distance of 5.8 x 10 -11 m, which is approximately 
the mean radius between proton and electron, to the ra- 
dius of the earth and then adjusted the sizes of proton 
and electron in proportion. I recalculated this three 
times because I couldn't believe it either. To bring the 
electron alone to the size of a walnut, you have to enlarge 
it trillions of times. The other values for proton and ra- 
dius too, of course, and then adjust them to scale to the 
earth's radius of around 6,300 kilometers. And whether 
the electron is as big as a walnut or an orange - that 
doesn't make any difference here. There is simply a gi- 
gantic amount of "zero space" in an atom. So, in our 
model we have a spherical skyscraper in the middle, 
around which a walnut rotates at a distance of 6,300 kil- 
ometers. And this creates an electron shell as big as the 
earth." 


Manfred pondered: "I've never thought of the atomic 
model that way before. There really is a whole lot of 
"nothing" between the atomic nucleus and the electron. 
Even if you were wrong by a few powers of ten in your 
calculation, which of course I don't believe," he grinned, 
"that would only lead to relatively marginal differences 
in these dimensions. So, all matter consists of a lot of 
"nothing" and a few elementary particles," Manfred 
mused. 


145 


It all comes and goes out of nothing 


"It's obviously not quite like that either," Ralf inter- 
jected. "Because now the quantum physicists are coming 
around the corner and claiming that such a proton or 
electron is not the smallest particle - and certainly not 
solid. Rather, according to quantum physics, these in 
turn consist of "quarks". These are even much smaller 
particles that are theoretically described by means of 
quantum mechanics. 


And the best thing about these particles is that they 
suddenly appear out of empty space and disappear 
again. So there is a constant coming and going of quarks 
in a proton or electron. Consequently, our trillion-fold 
enlarged electron walnut does not consist of solid matter 


146 


at all. It is formed from energy particles that suddenly 
appear out of nowhere and disappear again. 


The theory of quantum mechanics is used by physi- 
cists to describe the properties of matter. And the great 
thing about it is that it has even been proven to work. 
We owe many of today's technical achievements to the 
quantum mechanical calculations of these physicists. 
So, it works on the assumption of a model of constantly 
coming and going energy states. Or, if I put it another 
way, the whole of quantum mechanics works on the tacit 
assumption that matter, as we perceive it every day, 
does not exist as a solid substance. 


The cup here is there and the coffee in this cup is also 
real. But only on the level that we can perceive with our 
five senses. But if I go deeper into matter and look for 
the smallest particle that this cup is made of, I will end 
up seeing only energy fields in the form of quarks, but 
certainly no solid matter. 


From the fact that quantum mechanical calculations 
lead to real and functioning products, it can be cau- 
tiously deduced from my point of view that quantum me- 
chanics could work," Ralf grinned. "But then everything 
we can see and touch, and of course we humans, would 
consist of pure energy. 


The fatal thing is that when we talk about quantum 
mechanics, we are moving in a field of highly complex 
theories. Ultimately, what is missing is proof through 
experiment. 


147 


And in order to provide this proof, i.e. to understand 
how matter is really constructed, twenty countries oper- 
ate the "CERN" nuclear research center in Switzerland. 
There, tiny particles are accelerated to almost the speed 
of light in so-called particle accelerators and then guided 
via magnets so that they collide. During this collision, 
these particles are broken down into even smaller frag- 
ments or, more precisely, fracture energies. Scientists 
hope to gain new insights into the structure of matter. 


On 04 July 2012, physicists at the CERN research 
centre reported the discovery of the "God particle"." "The 
discovery of the what-particle?" asked Manfred in 
amazement. "Yes," Ralf smiled, "you heard right. I said 
the word "God particle". And I said it in connection with 
experiments at the world's largest center for nuclear re- 
search, a research center for physics, which is a very ex- 
act science. By the way, the experts call it the "Higgs 


woe 


boson". 


"And why is this "Higgs boson" called a "God parti- 
cle"?" asked Manfred in amazement. "It's called that be- 
cause this particle is supposed to make the build-up of 
mass, 1.e. weight and thus matter, possible in the first 
place. The researchers have the first indications of the 
existence of such a particle, but they still need much 
more data," Ralf explained. 


"The interesting thing, however, is the statement 
that this tiny God particle is supposed to be responsible 
for the emergence of the universe as we know it. But 


148 


since in quantum physics we speak of "energy particles", 
1.e. particles that are massless, I would want to use the 
word "God energy" much more appropriately here. 


Basically, we do not know what matter is made of. 
But there is much, not to say everything, to suggest that 
matter consists of pure energy. And this applies to every 
form of matter, namely organic and inorganic. In other 
words: the unfortunately empty cup here, the table, the 
whole house and also Brigitte, you and I consist of pure 
energy, which we only perceive as solid matter. And 
when I put it like that," Ralf added, "I stand firmly on 
the ground of the exact science of physics." 


"IT have never thought about matter as consciously as 
I do now," Manfred said musingly. "It's not as if there is 
no mass in physics. Every elementary particle, no mat- 
ter how small, also carries mass." 


"Of course there is mass," Ralf said. "We are there, 
everything we touch and carry has a weight. So do we," 
he added, looking down at himself with a smile. "The 
only question is where this mass comes from. If I now go 
back to the mass of the smallest elementary particles, 
then these are, after all, theoretically determined val- 
ues. Because no one in the world is able to really meas- 
ure the weight of an elementary particle. 


149 


Matter or Energy? 


According to Einstein's famous equation E = mc’, 
mass, 1.e. matter, and energy are completely convertible 
into each other." Ralf stood up and went to the flipchart 
in the corner of the room. "Let's just have a look at this 
formula," he said and wrote the formula E = mc? on the 
white paper with a dry blue felt-tip pen. 


"Here, the letter "E" stands for energy, the letter "m" 
for mass, 1.e. weight, and the letter "c" for the speed of 
light, i.e. the speed at which light travels when I switch 
on a lamp, for example. By the way, the speed of light is 
300,000 kilometres per second, unimaginably fast," he 
added. "Just to get a feel for how fast light is, we can 
bring out our atomic model again, i.e. the Earth," Ralf 
laughed. 


"The earth has a circumference of around 40,000 kil- 
ometers. If we now imagine that a light would move at 


150 


300,000 kilometers per second parallel to the earth's 
surface, then we only need to divide 300,000 by 40,000 
to get a vague idea of this speed." Ralf tapped on his cal- 
culator. "Seven and a half," he noted. "If Iimagine I were 
to switch on a torch here and the beam of light were to 
travel around the earth, then it would have already 
whizzed around the earth 7.5 times in one second. 


And while we're on the subject of these unimaginable 
dimensions, we might as well take a look at Polar star, 
which was used for navigation by seafarers all over the 
world before the GPS system existed," he added. It is 430 
light years away from Earth. So, it takes 430 years for 
light to travel from the Polar star to the Earth. Of 
course, you can also calculate the distance in kilome- 
ters." Ralf tapped on his calculator again. "300,000 x 60 
x 60 x 24 x 360 x 430," he muttered to himself. "That's a 
four with fifteen zeros, which is what it comes out to. So, 
Polaris is four trillion kilometers away from us. You 
can't imagine these dimensions at all, neither on a large 
nor on a small scale. And the human being stands in the 
middle of it and says with conviction: I know, I already 
know everything. 


Now that we've talked about incomprehensible di- 
mensions again, we can put a few values into Einstein's 
formula," he suggested. He went to the middle window 
and took a large, strangely smooth-looking, dark brown 
stone from the windowsill. Brigitte's eyes widened in 
horror and she became restless. "This petrified root here 
weighs about ten kilograms," Ralf grinned 


151 


mischievously and, with a sideways glance at Brigitte, 
let the root slide several times from one hand to the 
other. 


"Einstein now says with his equation that this mass 
of ten kilograms can be completely converted into en- 
ergy. And how much energy is in this root, we can just 
calculate that." Gingerly, he put the root back in its 
place. Brigitte breathed a sigh of relief. The same thing 
every time, she thought, and for the twentieth time she 
resolved to find a new place for the root. 


"So," Ralf said and began to write. "E is equal to 10 
kilograms of petrified root times the speed of light 
squared. So that the units are correct afterwards, we 
now have to multiply the speed of light of 300,000 kilo- 
meters per second by 1000 so that we arrive at meters 
per second. So now we put in 300,000,000 meters per 
second for the speed of light. And now we square this 
value, because Einstein would certainly have insisted on 
his c?. So then we have a value of 90,000,000,000,000 
meters squared, divided by seconds squared. Now we 
multiply this value by the 10 kilograms of Brigitte's root, 
and we have the energy E contained in the root, in New- 
ton meters. The unit kilogram times meter squared by 
second is summarized as newton. With the remaining 
unit of meter, the unit for Einstein's E is created, namely 
Newton meter. 


In this case, the term newton meter expresses a me- 
chanical energy, namely a torque. The energy of one 


152 


newton meter corresponds exactly to the energy of one 
watt second or even the energy of one joule. 


So, we can choose how we want to express the energy 
from Brigitte's root. Here I simply choose the general 
term for energy, namely the joule. Thus, the result E is 
equal to 900,000,000,000,000 joules. To avoid the scien- 
tific notation and still keep track of all the zeros, we can 
also express the value in petajoules, where one petajoule 
is ten to the power of fifteen joules. The value of Eis then 
900 petajoules." 


"And what do I have to imagine by that now?" asked 
Brigitte. "That is the energy that would result from the 
complete transformation of 10 kilograms of matter. By 
the way, 900 petajoules correspond to 250 billion kilo- 
watt hours. The energy from your root could cover Ger- 
many's entire energy needs for a month. 


What Einstein sums up with his formula E = mc? is 
the fact that matter and energy are equivalent. One is 
converted into the other. So, the root is not burnt like a 
piece of coal here, but it goes directly from its materially 
manifested state into pure energy. Of course, the whole 
thing also works the other way around. So much for the 
theory. 


In practice, however, we are only able to use the effect 
of energy generation through the transformation of mat- 
ter to an extremely limited extent. If we want to convert 
matter into energy today, it only works with materials 
that are inherently unstable. Then we must first 


153 


laboriously enrich radioactive uranium in gas centri- 
fuges or diffusion plants in order to then convert the 
tiny, enriched part into energy in a controlled manner in 
nuclear reactors. We then use it to boil water and drive 
turbines with the steam, which in turn drive generators 
to produce electricity. 


Today, mankind is only able to use a tiny fraction of 
what Einstein's formula contains. That," Ralf mused, "is 
also fortunate for all of us. Because if we were techni- 
cally able to convert Brigitte's root into energy, then 
some sorcerer's apprentice would surely blow up the 
planet. 


The essential information that I personally take from 
the equation E = mc? is the fact that matter and energy 
are seamlessly convertible into each other, i.e. equiva- 
lent. Taking into account the fact that no physicist has 
ever found the smallest solid particle, no matter how 
elaborates the experiments, and that they are searching 
for the "God particle" in CERN, I firmly believe that 
every form of matter consists of pure energy. And when 
I say energy, I mean an infinitely large spectrum of psy- 
chic energies, all of which have individual information. 


I see this view absolutely confirmed in the double-slit 
experiment, which for me is one of the most fascinating 
experiments in physics. This is because it clearly proves 
that matter or energy, just as one would like to see it, 
never exists independently of its environment.“ 


154 


Spirit controls matter 


"The double-slit experiment?" asked Manfred. "That 
doesn't mean anything to me at the moment. If I ever 
heard anything about it, I must have successfully sup- 
pressed it in the meantime," he grinned. What kind of 
experiment is this?" 


"Imagine," Ralf replied, "you're sitting in a dark room, 
you have a torch in your hand and you shine it on a wall. 
Now take a sheet of paper and cut two small slits in it, 
about as thick as a pencil and maybe five centimeters 
long, parallel to each other. Now hold this sheet of paper 
with the two narrow, rectangular cut-outs in front of the 
light of your torch and see how the two slits appear on 
the wall. They form two parallel, bright bars. 


With this experimental set-up, we now go to the phys- 
ics lab. Here, instead of the torch, we now take a preci- 
sion light source with which we can generate individual 
light particles, i.e. photons. Instead of the wall, we now 


155 


have a detector screen and our sheet of paper is now re- 
placed by an aperture with two slits. The experimental 
set-up is ready and now we want to see what happens: 


First, we close one of the two slits and switch on the 
light source. On the detector screen, a bar appears where 
the light particles hit, which corresponds to the slit in 
our aperture. Great, that's what we expected. This is the 
same effect we had with the torch on the wall. 


Now we open the second slit and switch on the light 
again. On the detector screen, several bars of different 
intensities are now gradually formed, which no longer 
correspond at all to the slits in the aperture. The distri- 
bution of the light points on the detector screen now cor- 
responds to a wave. Actually, two sharply defined beams 
would have been expected, just like in the first attempt, 
but with two beams. Somehow the individual light par- 
ticles seem to have deflected each other when passing 
through the slits. We want to rule this out in our next 
experiment. 


We repeat the experiment, both gaps are open, but 
now we shoot one photon after the other from our light 
source. This should rule out the possibility of the light 
particles deflecting each other. But what happens now? 
To our surprise, exactly the same wave pattern forms 
again. There is no trace of sharply defined beams. 


This means", Ralf continued his explanations, "that 
every single photon must have passed through both gaps 
at the same time. The formation of the wave-like 


156 


distribution on the detector screen can only be explained 
by the fact that the light particles influence each other 
when they have passed through the slits. So, in this ex- 
periment, the light has the character of a wave that su- 
perimposes itself after passing the slit and thus forms 
interference patterns. It's just like standing at a pond 
and letting two pebbles fall into the water at the same 
time. Then circular waves also form at first, which over- 
lap when they meet. The wave pattern that then devel- 
ops is completely different. 


In any case, 1t must have been the case in our last 
experiment that every single photon passed through 
both gaps at the same time. But now we want to know 
exactly and install measuring instruments at both gaps. 
In this way, we want to find out which photon goes 
through which slit. We switch on the light source again. 
To our surprise, two sharply outlined bars now form on 
the detector screen, matching the two slits exactly." 


"How come now?" asked Manfred in amazement. 
"That's the fascinating thing about this experiment, 
which has probably been carried out a thousand times 
all over the world," said Ralf. "And always with the same 
results. Light has the character of a wave, but the mo- 
ment the photons are measured, i.e. observed, the wave 
nature of light immediately breaks down and then it has 
the character of matter. Then it behaves the way we ex- 
pect it to behave," Ralf smiled. 


157 


Manfred looked up in amazement. "Does that mean 
that the photons notice whether they are being observed 
or not?" "Exactly that," Ralf confirmed. "The wave na- 
ture of light forms the superposition of thousands of pos- 
sibilities. And it is only with measurement, i.e. observa- 
tion, that we pick out a specific state. With that, we have 
manifested a specific state and the wave breaks down." 


"That would mean," Manfred reflected, "that we in- 
fluence the world through our observation alone. How- 
ever, a photon is a tiny, massless particle and thus, for 
me, no matter." 


"If a photon is too small for you, then I can also offer 
you real matter," Ralf said with a smile. "The same ex- 
periment has also been done under vacuum with fuller- 
enes, using molecules of sixty carbon atoms. These mas- 
sive particles also exhibited a wave nature, which then 
collapsed when they were observed, i.e. measured. This 
shows nothing other than that matter can also be repre- 
sented as energy and vice versa. Energy here forms an 
ocean full of possibilities. And through observation I pick 
out one of these possibilities and the energy is mani- 
fested as matter. 


Every measurement is an observation. Matter is 
manifested energy. We are all made of matter and en- 
ergy at the same time. Everything is in permanent, en- 
ergetic interaction with each other. Only at the moment 
when we ourselves determine a state, i.e. through meas- 
urements or also through our expectations, do we pick 


158 


out one single possibility from an infinite sea of possibil- 
ities, which is then manifested as matter. And because 
we have all learned to see and perceive matter, the world 
that surrounds us exists in the form that we have cre- 
ated in accordance with our collective consciousness. 
And with every observation, with every thought and 
above all with every feeling, we change the world," Ralf 
added thoughtfully. "And the feelings arise in our sub- 
conscious, through our individual perception of our en- 
vironment, which takes place according to our uncon- 
scious programs.“ 


"That would mean that everyone unconsciously 
brings about everything that happens in their lives 
themselves," Manfred concluded with an incredulous 
look. "That's exactly how it is," Brigitte agreed. "And 
how can I actively influence that?", Manfred wanted to 
know. "Let's look at some other phenomena of life first 
and then we'll talk about this in detail," Ralf suggested. 
Manfred nodded in agreement. 


159 


Spooky long-distance effect? 


"We should talk briefly about an unexplained phe- 
nomenon of nature," Ralf continued. "Namely, with what 
Albert Einstein called 'spooky action at a distance’. 


If you create a pair of photons in a system and direct 
these two photons in different directions, then they drift 
apart at the speed of light. The phenomenon is that 
these two photons always have exactly the same proper- 
ties at the time of a measurement. They are entangled 
with each other. At the moment when a certain property 
is measured in one of the two photons, the other has ex- 
actly the same measured values. 


And now we have a problem. According to Einstein's 
theory of relativity, the highest speed that can be 
reached is the speed of light. But if the two photons are 
moving in opposite directions at the speed of light, how 
can it be that the photons always have the same proper- 
ties at the time of a measurement? After all, the two par- 
ticles are moving away from each other, each at the 
speed of light. Accordingly, the distance between these 
two photons increases at twice the speed of light. 


160 


This raises the question of the mysterious way in 
which the two photons are connected to each other. Com- 
munication of any kind between the two particles can 
probably be ruled out, as this would have to take place 
at the speed of faster-than-light. Nevertheless, the two 
photons are connected in a mysterious way. 


If, however, communication between the entangled 
photons can be ruled out, then these photons must be 
connected to each other on a higher level that is neither 
perceptible nor measurable for us. Nevertheless, such a 
level must exist, because otherwise entanglement would 
not work. And it does. 


You experienced this higher level I am talking about 
during your hypnosis in the state of trance," Ralf turned 
to Manfred. "But we'll get to that in a moment when we 
talk about your hypnosis. Let's tick off the physics first," 
Ralf suggested. When Manfred nodded in agreement, 
Ralf continued: 


"In an experiment conducted at the University of Ge- 
neva in 2008, Nikolas Gisin and his colleagues proved 
that the speed at which the entangled photons exchange 
information about their respective properties is at least 
10,000 times faster than the speed of light. After deduct- 
ing all possible measurement tolerances and sources of 
error, mind you. However, the speed is probably much 
higher, possibly even infinite, the researchers discuss. 


But now they are faced with a huge conundrum, be- 
cause such speeds do not fit the speed limit set by Albert 


161 


Einstein with his theory of relativity. And that only al- 
lows 300,000 kilometers per second," Ralf grinned. "But, 
as we found out at the beginning: In physics, it's the ex- 
periment that counts. Even if you can't explain it, entan- 
glement still works perfectly. Of course, one would like 
to make technical use of that as soon as possible. 


"International research teams," Ralf continued, "are 
currently in a race to develop the transmission of infor- 
mation through the teleportation of photons. In 2012, 
Viennese physics professor Anton Zeilinger and his team 
succeeded in teleporting light particles with quantum 
information over a distance of one hundred and forty- 
three kilometers. Before that, Chinese researchers were 
still ahead, with a distance of one hundred kilometers." 


"Did you say teleport?" asked Manfred. "Yes," Ralf re- 
plied, "I said 'teleport'. By "teleport" I mean, metaphori- 
cally speaking, the "dissolving" of an object in one place 
and the reappearance of that object in another place, 
much like the "Starship Enterprise," Ralf added. 


"Of course, Professor Zeilinger does not teleport mat- 
ter with mass, but he uses the effect of Einstein's 
"spooky action at a distance" to teleport quantum infor- 
mation. In doing so, he uses a higher level on which the 
laws of physics as we know them do not seem to apply. 


When I look at everything we know today about the 
structure of matter, I have to say with appreciation that 
researchers have made terrific progress in the last hun- 
dred years. And with today's possibilities of data 


162 


processing and communication, research teams all over 
the world will come to even more detailed and extensive 
findings ever more quickly. I am firmly convinced of 
that. 


However, I am equally convinced that there are infi- 
nite connections between matter and energy that we do 
not yet know and that there is a million times more to 
understand than what we believe we have understood 
today. In this respect," Ralf continued, "I can only fully 
endorse Max Planck's view, which he expressed in a lec- 
ture in the following words: 


" Gentlemen, as a physicist who has devoted his 
whole life to sober science, to the study of matter, I am 
certainly free trom the suspicion of being taken for a 
swarm spirit. 


And so, after my explorations of the atom, I say this: 
There is no matter in itself. 


All matter arises and exists only through a force 
which sets the atomic particles in vibration and holds 
them together to form the tiniest solar system in the unt- 
verse. But since there is neither an intelligent force nor 
an eternal force in the whole universe - mankind has not 
succeeded in inventing the longed-for perpetual motion 
machine - we must assume a conscious, intelligent spirit 
behind this force. This spirit is the original basis of all 
matter. It is not the visible but transient matter that is 
real, true, actual - for matter would not exist at all with- 
out the spirit - but the invisible, immortal spirit that is 


163 


true! But since there cannot be spirit in itself either, but 
every spirit belongs to a being, we must necessarily as- 
sume spirit beings. But since even spiritual beings can- 
not be of themselves, but must be created, I do not hest- 
tate to name this mysterious creator in the same way as 
all the cultural peoples of the earth of earlier millennia 
have called him: God! With this, the physicist, who has 
to deal with matter, moves from the realm of matter to 
the realm of spirit. And this is the end of our task, and 
we must pass on our research into the hands of philoso- 
phy." Max Planck 


164 


Ready for new insights? 


In the meantime, it was almost 2 pm. Brigitte had 
gone to the kitchen and prepared a plate of sandwiches 
and made fresh coffee. After all, her view of things and 
Ralf's were completely identical, as was the way they 
worked. So, she had used the time to take care of the 
physical well-being. 


When she came in, Manfred was still sitting rather 
thoughtfully in his armchair. He only noticed her when 
she began to re-set the table. "Well?" she asked Manfred 
sympathetically, "was that a bit much at once?" 


"Not that," Manfred replied thoughtfully. "I know the 
subject of physics quite well, but the perspective makes 
me think. As a building physicist, I apply the laws of 
physics every day, but I haven't dealt with basic consid- 
erations about the structure of matter since my studies. 
And that was twenty years ago. So, I developed the cer- 
tainty of working on the basis of a completely exact sci- 
ence. I never dreamed of questioning the fundamentals. 
If you had told me at the beginning of our conversation 
that matter was energy and then moved on to my ques- 
tions, I probably wouldn't have even noticed." 


"We only did this excursion into the world of physics," 
Ralf said, "so that we could demonstrate on a solid, sci- 
entific basis how little we really know about the world 
we live in. We don't know how an atom is built and what 


165 


everything we can see and touch, in other words every- 
thing that exists, is basically made of. But we have found 
out that matter particles behave completely differently 
when they are observed than when they are unobserved. 
And finally, we know that matter can be converted into 
energy and vice versa. In the search for the smallest par- 
ticle, physicists find nothing but pure energy. 


You had asked the question, Manfred, what is this 
universal energy that we connect with during our treat- 
ments. You had experiences during your hypnosis that 
you would never have thought possible before. If Brigitte 
or I had answered this question about the energy from 
the wrist, you would probably have switched off after 
five minutes at the latest. Because you are a polite per- 
son, you would have listened to us, but your thoughts 
would probably have wandered off. I am not speaking to 
you personally, but on behalf of everyone who is learning 
about this energy for the first time. 


What we are about to explain to you is based on our 
own experience of energy work over the last fifteen 
years. However, this would sound so absurd to you that 
you would not even be able to take it in if we had not 
first shaken your world view a little on a purely scientific 
basis. The reason for this is very simple: once we hu- 
mans have learned something and internalized it to 
such an extent that it has become an unconscious con- 
viction, we no longer accept anything else that contra- 
dicts this conviction. That is quite natural." 


166 


"It is much more difficult to question something 
learned and experienced than to relearn anything," 
Brigitte interjected. "We learn from childhood to old age. 
However, the willingness to learn or rethink something 
new decreases with increasing age. A child learns at an 
incredible speed until the age of six. In the process, it 
absorbs everything it learns completely without bias. By 
the end of puberty, it has already gathered so much ex- 
perience that when it perceives something new, the 
brain automatically decides whether it needs to learn 
something new or whether the perception should be ig- 
nored. And a person in middle or old age has of course 
gathered even more experiences that are stored in the 
form of unconscious programs. And he then defends 
them tooth and nail. 


We have grown up in a society that is extremely per- 
formance-oriented and develops at breakneck speed. A 
person's whole world view is formed by the environment 
in which he grows up. This world view is shaped by the 
convictions he has gained during his life." 


Brigitte smiled mischievously, "And since not all peo- 
ple have previous experience with regression, spirit be- 
ings or energy work, we always try to explain the expe- 
riences we have had with these things as comprehensi- 
bly as possible. It is very important to us to offer the ex- 
periences we have made in our work and the insights we 
have gained from them to people who are interested, as 
if on a platter. So that everyone can take exactly what 


167 


they want to accept from this tray. They can simply 
leave the rest. 


Manfred had been listening intently. "Yes," he re- 
marked. "If you had explained to me just two months ago 
that regressions to past lives were a reality, I would have 
asked you about your state of your spirit. Such a thing 
as I experienced in hypnosis was beyond anything I 
could ever have imagined. But today I am absolutely 
convinced that past-life regressions do exist. After all, I 
have experienced one myself. And the effect I achieved 
with it has absolutely improved my whole life and also 
my state of health.“ 


The unconscious dimension 


168 


"Good," Ralf said happily, "then we can go in search 
of the universal energy. To do that, we'd best go back to 
Once-one's "spooky action at a distance", i.e. the myste- 
rious connection of two photons." 


Ralf took two half-cheese rolls from the plate. Brigitte 
and Manfred had been eating while he had been talking. 


"This," Ralf explained, placing the two halves of the 
roll-on top of each other, "is a quantum system." As he 
did so, he held up the now complete bun demonstra- 
tively. "The moment I now divide it again, my two pho- 
tons are created, which are entangled with each other 
because they come from one system." 


He unfolded the bun halves and held half a cheese 
bun with his left hand towards the middle window on 
the street side. With his right hand he held the other 
half cheese roll towards the opposite window to the 
courtyard side of the building. 


"This photon here I now call Petra". With those 
words, Ralf wiggled his left arm and looked at the half 
cheese roll. Then he looked to his right. "And this photon 
here I call Peter. Petra and Peter are something like 
twins because they come from one system. If I were to 
bite off a piece of Petra now, then Peter would also be 
missing exactly the same piece. If I were to paint Peter 
green now, then Petra would also be green at the same 
moment. These two photons therefore always have the 


169 


same properties because they are entangled with each 
other. 


If the whole thing were to happen in slow motion, I 
could bite a corner off Petra and then Petra could wave 
over to Peter and say, "Look, that corner has to go". Then 
Peter would also remove the identical corner and per- 
haps call over with a beaming smile: "Hello Petra, we 
are the same again! The whole thing has the small catch, 
however, that I can't really hold Petra and Peter in my 
hands. The moment I open the roll, Petra flies west at 
the speed of light and Peter flies east. And whatever the 
two of them do, they have the same properties at all 
times, even if they are light years apart. 


But how do they do it? Petra and Peter both fly in 
opposite directions at the speed of light. This means that 
the distance between our pair of twins increases at twice 
the speed of light. This would not be a problem in itself, 
but Einstein says that the single speed of light is the 
highest speed that can ever be reached. So, communica- 
tion between the two is out of the question. 


Now, Professor Gisin comes around the corner and 
finds out in the experiment that Petra and Peter could 
very well communicate with each other if they wanted 
to, because the speed at which the two could exchange 
information would be at least ten thousand times higher 
than the speed of light. Now everyone is faced with a 
riddle. Whether and when this riddle will ever be solved 
with the laws of physics, I do not know. 


170 


But there is one thing I can say with certainty," Ralf 
continued, "and that is that a person in hypnosis who is 
in a hypnotic deep trance has a completely different per- 
ceptive faculty than someone who, like us now, is in wak- 
ing consciousness. And if I ask the person in hypnosis in 
this state of deep trance whether all people are energet- 
ically connected with each other, then in a flash comes 
an astonished "Of course" or something similar. The an- 
swer to this question usually comes with an uncompre- 
hending laugh, as if the subconscious is astonished by 
this question. Of course, the subconscious cannot really 
be astonished, but it is usually the case that answers to 
questions that seem completely banal to the subcon- 
scious mind are accompanied by spontaneous laughter," 
Ralf noted. 


"You also answered this question in your hypnosis 
with a resounding laugh, Manfred, do you remember 
that?" asked Brigitte. "Yes," Manfred stated in surprise. 
"When you asked that question, I really had to laugh at 
the answer. It was somehow so clear and so self-evident 
that I guess I was astonished that someone could ask 
about something that was so self-evident." 


"When someone is in a hypnosis, in a deep trance," 
Ralf explained, "then you can also calmly ask him if eve- 
rything is energetically connected, that is really every- 
thing and not just the people. And so far, every hypno- 
tized person has answered this question with a clear 
"yes", usually with a laugh. 


171 


If I now return to our two entangled photons here," 
Ralf wiggled the two half buns, "then not only are these 
two entangled with each other, but they are also ener- 
getically connected with everything that exists. And that 
is also logical," Ralf added. "Because the whole universe 
emerged from a single system with the Big Bang. Ac- 
cordingly, everything is energetically connected to each 
other. In the state of deep trance, we perceive this con- 
nection and can answer questions about it. But there is 
also a wealth of other insights into this, which we will 
be happy to present to you afterwards, Manfred. 


But now we should turn to the problem of the speed 
of the exchange of information between our two halves 
of the bun from the point of view of the hypnotist in deep 
trance. From the hypnotist's point of view, this exchange 
of information does not exist, which would save the the- 
ory of relativity. 


While Brigitte was in a deep trance, I asked her sev- 
eral times whether there is any time at all in the higher 
dimension. And of course, also whether the dimension of 
space exists there. The answer that Brigitte, to be more 
precise, Brigitte's spiritual-guide, gave me each time 
was a clear "no". This answer always came in a changed 
voice and with Brigitte snorting with laughter. 


When I asked what units of measurement existed in 
this dimension, the almost pitying answer came: "You 
humans always think in scales. Here, there is only be- 
ing. 


172 


"But if there is no space and no time in this dimen- 
sion, in which I believe the entanglement of photons is 
also based, then there can be no speed there either. Ac- 
cordingly, in this higher dimension of entanglement, the 
two photons are not separate at all. We only perceive 
them as separate and entangled in our dimension. We 
would like to use this property of our photons being sep- 
arated and entangled, which is real from our point of 
view, for the transmission of information, which re- 
searchers like Professor Zeilinger and Professor Gisin 
will certainly succeed in doing one day. This apparent 
entanglement, which is real in our dimension, does not 
exist in a higher-level reality, since there can be no spa- 
tial separation there. 


On this superordinate level of being, everything is in- 
terconnected. In this dimension there is always "here" 
and always "now". Here everything is "One" and yet 
every single energy of consciousness is individual. 


That is why I am now reuniting the photons Petra 
and Peter, who seem to be separated in our perceptible 
reality, and establishing their physical unity with me," 
Ralf grinned. With these words, he placed the two half 
cheese rolls on top of each other again and took a hearty 
bite. 


The unconditional love 


173 


Manfred had listened with interest. He thought 
about it: "So you mean that the two photons that are 
separated from each other in our world are still together 
in a higher-level world? "And that the fact that Petra 
and Peter are always identically the same is only due to 


the fact that they are not separated at all in another re- 
ality?", he added. 


"Yes, that's exactly what I mean," Ralf agreed. "But 
here I would not speak of another reality. This 'higher 
reality' is also our reality, only that we cannot perceive 
it with our conscious senses. But the fact that we cannot 
consciously perceive this level of our reality does not 
mean that it is not there." Ralf made a gliding motion 
with his hand. "There are thousands of radio waves in 
this room. We can't perceive them consciously either, but 
we know they're there. Only when we switch on the ra- 
dio do we have proof. 


Our subconscious is something like our "Inner radio". 
It is connected on an immaterial level with everything 
that exists. Each of us is surrounded by an energy field 
that we call the "aura". Through it, we continuously send 
and receive psychic energy, which comes from our sub- 
conscious or is absorbed by it. Of course, all this happens 
without us noticing a thing, unconsciously. 


So, if we want to find out more about our life and our 
whole being, or if we want to change something funda- 
mentally, then we have to make contact with our sub- 
conscious in some way. Shamans and spiritual healers 


174 


all over the world do this in many different ways. Either 
they dance or drum themselves into a trance or they take 
mind-expanding drugs, usually a brew of plant juices. 
Buddhist monks meditate for years, while medially in- 
clined people receive messages intuitively. We here, we 
use energy work in combination with hypnosis," Ralf 
added. 


"What are these psychic energies that are absorbed 
and emitted by the aura?" asked Manfred. "They can be 
all kinds of energies," Brigitte answered. "You absorb 
the energies of your environment with your aura. Your 
subconscious then perceives these energies according to 
its unconscious programs and sends back "response en- 
ergies". I will give you an example: 


Imagine you have a good friend who lives in New 
York. You haven't seen each other for years. This friend 
decides to call you because he wants to hear how you are. 
The moment he decides to pick up the phone, he sends 
out waves of psychic energies through his aura, which 
you pick up through your aura. If you are not in a stress- 
ful situation at that moment, the thought of your friend 
immediately comes to your mind - and the phone rings. 
You pick up the phone and say in amazement: "What a 
coincidence, I was just thinking of you". 


So, there is a constant exchange and superimposition 
of energy waves in your aura, independent of any verbal 
communication." "And this universal energy that you 
connect with, is that also in the aura?" asked Manfred. 


175 


"Yes," answered Brigitte, "it is also in the aura. This en- 
ergy is omnipresent and in everyone's aura. When we 
say that we connect with this energy, we become aware 
that we are part of it. We then resonate with this energy 
and become very aware of it. We then intuitively allow 
ourselves to be guided by this energy. 


Many of our hypnotized clients experience this energy 
of unconditional, all-encompassing love even in the state 
of deep trance. For example, it happens quite often that 
someone experiences their own death in a regression. 
That was not the case with your regression," Brigitte 
smiled at Manfred, "but I would have wished it on you, 
Manfred.” 


Manfred looked at her in horror. "No, I really would 
have wished it on you," Brigitte answered Manfred's un- 
spoken question. "Everyone, really absolutely everyone, 
who has gone through their own death in a previous life 
during hypnosis, then, when physical death has oc- 
curred, perceives a bright and infinitely loving light that 
takes them in completely. At such a moment we let peo- 
ple enjoy for a few minutes this incredible love by which 
they are completely absorbed and suffused at that mo- 
ment. It is always a touching and incredibly gratifying 
moment to look into such completely happy faces. The 
hypnotized clients are all so moved at this moment that 
they have tears running down their faces.“ 


Manfred was very impressed by Brigitte's descrip- 
tions. When Brigitte had explained to him benevolently 


176 


that she would have liked him to experience his own 
death in a previous life during his hypnosis, he had been 
slightly shocked at first. But the subsequent description 
of what happens during hypnosis had really impressed 
him. But to be on the safe side, he asked again. 


"Was that really the case with every hypnosis in 
which someone went through their own death?" he 
asked. "Yes," Brigitte replied, "with every single one." 
Ralf nodded in agreement. "It was the same with me, 
with really every hypnosis in which death was experi- 
enced. But that doesn't mean," he went on to explain, 
"that this is the only way one can experience uncondi- 
tional love for oneself. No human being has to die to have 
this experience. There are certainly plenty of people who 
have had similar experiences through meditations, en- 
ergy work or in some other way and can have them again 
at any time. The only difference is that the experience of 
this unconditionally loving energy is particularly in- 
tense during hypnosis. The prerequisite for this is, of 
course, that a very deep trance is achieved." 


Ralf looked at Brigitte: "Do you still remember the old 
lady, back then at the Eickesmitihle?" "Yes, that's right," 
Brigitte laughed, "tell me about it." "We had an elderly 
lady as a guest for a talk back then, in our former busi- 
ness premises. She wanted to know more about the top- 
ics of death, dying and mourning. Then we told her the 
same thing we have told you now. 


177 


The lady was very keen to experience this feeling of 
being loved and accepted by the light for herself. Then I 
hypnotized her. But because she was so excited and cu- 
rious, she literally lay in wait during the hypnosis to see 
what would happen next. Of course, it was not possible 
to put the lady into a trance and I dissolved the hypno- 
sis. She was of course very disappointed, but when I ex- 
plained to her why I thought it had not worked, she 
wanted to try again. 


We had another coffee and then repeated the hypno- 
sis. It took an eternity until she went into a short, me- 
dium trance state. Of course, this was not nearly 
enough. Nevertheless, I took her up the spiral staircase, 
which you also know from your hypnosis, Manfred. Then 
we walked, round and round. We walked down the stairs 
and back up again. The trance state changed only mar- 
ginally. In between we stopped several times and when 
I asked her where she was now, she answered each time: 
"On the stairs". 


Then we started running again. We ran down the 
stairs, lap after lap, on and on. With each step she was 
supposed to slide deeper into the trance. Judging by the 
scarce time available during hypnosis, the deepening 
had already taken ages. 


But suddenly her eyes started rolling and I said, 
"Stop." 


Then I asked her, "Where are you?" 


LS 


"On the stairs." 

"What do you see?" 

"There's a light," came the hesitant reply. 
"What is the light doing?", I asked. She replied: 
"It's coming towards mel" 


Then I just watched her. Seconds later she opened her 
eyes and looked up at the ceiling with a fixed expression. 
I then moved my hand over her eyes to see if she reacted, 
but she showed no eyelid closure reflex or pupil reaction. 
Her whole face was perfectly smooth, like a wax figure. 


I asked, "Where are you?" 


"In the light," came the answer after a while. It was 
no longer the lady's voice with which the answer was 
given, but rather the voice of a small child. By the way, 
that is often the case with very deep trances," Ralf ex- 
plained and continued with his narration. 


"Then I just asked her, "Is it nice in that light?" 


"Yes," came the answer. It was a breathed answer, 
again in the voice of the little child. No sooner had the 
lady uttered it than the tears ran from her open eyes. I 
let her enjoy the feeling and kept very quiet. Shortly be- 
fore the three minutes expired, after which she was to 
wake up immediately from hypnosis if she had not heard 


179 


my voice for more than three minutes, I spoke to her 
again: 


"Enjoy". The lady was visibly perfectly happy in her 
hypnosis. 


When it came time to dissolve the hypnosis, this 
turned out to be really tedious: 


"Now we go back to the stairs". Nothing moved. Then 
I repeated the request, this time a little more firmly. 


Then came the reply, "No!" 

"Why don't you go up the stairs?" 

"Tt's so beautiful here in the light." 

"Is the light only where you are now?" 
"No," came the reply. 

"Where else is the light?" 
"Everywhere." 


"And if the light is everywhere, then it is also in you, 
isn't it?" 


"Yes," came the little child's reply, this time happy 
and very stretched. 


"If the light is in you, then you can go up the stairs 
now, can't you?" 


180 


"Yes," replied the child in the old lady. 


"Then let's go back to the stairs now. Are you on the 
stairs?" 


"Yes," came the reply. 


"Good," I said. Then we will now go to the step of to- 
day and please tell me when you have reached that 
step." 


I wanted to make the discharge as gentle as possible. 
Therefore, I waited a little while and gave her time. 
Then I asked: 


"Did you bring your light?" Immediately and full of 
indignation the little child spoke out of the old lady: 


"T am the light!“ 


After the hypnosis was dissolved, the elderly lady be- 
gan to cry terribly. She was completely happy and freed 
from a huge burden. 


This energy of unconditional love is in everything and 
everyone in the world. This is the all-embracing, divine 
love that flows through the whole world and holds it to- 
gether. Through this love, every atom is held in place.“ 


181 


The question of the meaning of life 


After Ralf had finished, it was very quiet in the room 
for quite a while. Manfred was moved by the descrip- 
tions he had heard about the energy of unconditional 
love and now he let the words sink in. After a long pause, 
he began to speak thoughtfully: 


182 


"If everything, every single atom, is completely filled 
with this unconditional love, then we should all be walk- 
ing around with a blissful smile at every moment of our 
lives. Then there should be no wars and no other forms 
of violence." 


"You're absolutely right," Brigitte agreed. "But if this 
light of love is in every human being, and it is, that 
doesn't mean that every human being notices it. The old 
lady could only feel the light of love in hypnosis, from 
her subconscious in a state of deep trance. However, we 
are very rarely in this state and the vast majority of peo- 
ple in the world have never experienced this altered 
state of consciousness. So, they have not been able to 
have the profound personal experiences that are associ- 
ated with it. Think about the experiences you had in 
your hypnosis in your previous life. 


We perceive the world around us quite consciously, of 
course unnoticed and influenced by our unconscious pro- 
grams. Through this, the material world that surrounds 
us and in which we live appears to us as completely real. 
Since most people have not had any experiences beyond 
this, it is usually very difficult for them to imagine a far 
more complex view of the world. They live their lives 
with all the ups and downs. Only when they get into a 
serious life crisis do they start to think about the mean- 
ing of their lives and ask more far-reaching questions. 
Like Ralf did back then," she added. 


183 


"And what do you think the meaning of life is?" asked 
Manfred. "We live to be able to have the experiences we 
want to have," Brigitte explained spontaneously." 
Manfred had three question marks on his forehead. "It's 
all right," Brigitte laughed, "then I'll explain our view of 
the meaning of life to you in a little more detail. 


From hypnosis, from meditations and also through 
our involvement with near-death experiences, we know 
that the world we live in is a perfect illusion. In this per- 
fect illusion, matter, space and time are our reality. The 
whole thing is an optimal playground for active crea- 
tion," Brigitte smiled. 


"In the deep trance we also enter the state of interme- 
diate life, that is, ‘life between two lives’, if you like. It's 
an indescribably beautiful feeling - wonderful, impossi- 
ble to describe in words. It's like being part of a light- 
flooded mist. It's not like that, but this is the closest I 
can come to describing this state, because the real state 
can definitely not be described in words. Everything 
here is filled with light and love. It is a feeling of com- 
plete wholeness. Here there is only "being". Space and 
time do not exist here." Brigitte was positively radiant. 
"This is the spiritual level with which every human be- 
ing is always connected through their subconscious," she 
continued raving. "Here you have immense experience 
and an all-encompassing knowledge. 


But one thing you cannot do here is to have new ex- 
periences. But if you want to actively participate in 


184 


creation, then you have to have new experiences full of 
creativity. And if you want to have new experiences, 
then you have to go back to life as we know it. You can 
only have new experiences out of your consciousness, be- 
cause only your consciousness is creative. Your subcon- 
scious only administers. Only you yourself decide which 
experiences you want to have. Every human being, or 
rather, every individual energy of consciousness has the 
free will to do exactly what it wants to do. And this free 
will is to be respected absolutely. 


You, Manfred, had probably resolved in the phase be- 
fore your present life to conquer jealousy, which you al- 
ready knew from your previous life. That's why you came 
into your present life with the stressful experiences from 
your past life, with active, unconscious programs. By the 
way, this is also called "karma". With your free will you 
have actively sought a way to experience "letting go of 
jealousy". With your own free will, you can always carry 
out the actions that lead back to the experiences you 
want to have. And the beauty of it is that you can change 
your goals ten times a day if you feel like it. 


Some people want to have the experience of health 
and wealth. Many also want to experience serious ill- 
ness, suffering and pain, or even war. We came into this 
life to have exactly the experiences we want to have. 
Each of us for ourselves and according to our own free 
will. And the beauty of it is, everyone can decide differ- 
ently at any time and pursue a new goal. 


185 


That everything I have just explained to you is quite 
true can be seen in the example of a little eight-year-old 
boy who had spent half his young life in hospital and 
now had problems with his environment. The illness was 
cured when I hypnotized him. Nevertheless, I asked him 
in the hypnosis if he was completely healthy again. The 
boy then confirmed this to me in a deep trance. When I 
asked him why he had the illness, he answered: "I 
needed the experience! The boy was eight years old!" 


"So, you think I chose my jealousy myself, even before 
I was born?" asked Manfred. "It's quite possible that it 
was like that," Brigitte replied. "But why should I have 
chosen such a heavy burden? If I have the choice of what 
experience I want to have, then I can also choose some- 
thing pleasant. Why would anyone choose suffering or 
illness as an experience to have?" 


"Each soul is a unique energy of consciousness, a psy- 
chic energy of pure consciousness. On the energetic level 
of our being there is no suffering and there is no pain. 
There is only the experience of suffering or pain. And 
this experience, the knowledge of how it is, how it feels 
and the knowledge of having gone through it, leads to 
the personal growth of the soul," Brigitte answered. 


186 


Death and the eternity of being 


"After everything you've told me, you'd have to as- 
sume that you live forever," Manfred reflected. "That's 
right," said Brigitte, "1f you assume that, then you 
shouldn't be so far from the truth. Of course, there is a 
physical death of a human being. Only that this death 
occurs in our world of apparent reality, but not in the 
true reality of being. When death occurs, the physical 
body passes away, but not the individual consciousness 
energy of the soul. Completely independent of the 


187 


insights we have gained in our hypnoses, one comes to 
the same conclusions when analyzing near-death expe- 
riences." 


"What are near-death experiences?" inquired 
Manfred. "Near-death experiences are those experiences 
in which a person first dies, is then reanimated and af- 
terwards reports on the experiences he had during his 
death phase. There are serious research results about 
this worldwide. Probably the best-known researcher on 
death was the doctor Elisabeth Kiibler-Ross (1926 - 
2004). Dr. Kiibler-Ross spent half her life at the bedsides 
of dying people and sensitively accompanied many peo- 
ple through the process of dying. She is considered the 
founder of death research. She was awarded a total of 
twenty-three honorary doctorates for her research re- 
sults in this field. Today, her books are considered stand- 
ard works for doctors and nurses in her adopted country, 
the USA. However, this was not always the case. When 
she began to report that dying people often told her 
about out-of-body or even otherworldly experiences, 
many people turned away from her, calling her "crazy" 
or "scientifically dishonorable". Despite all the hostility, 
she continued her work. The doctor commented on this 
in an interview at the time. 


"In my opinion, the scientifically honorable person is 
the one who writes down what he has found out and also 
explains how he arrived at his conclusion. I would have 
to be fully distrusted and virtually accused of prostitu- 
tion if I were to publish only what pleases the general 


188 


opinion. I am not thinking of convincing or even convert- 
ing people. I see my work mainly in passing on what I 
have researched. Those who are ready for it will believe 
me. And those who are not will want to argue with the 
most unbelievable reasoning and know-it-alls." 


Elisabeth Kiibler-Ross 


"The characteristic of near-death experiences is the 
fact that the reports of people who have had such an ex- 
perience are similar all over the world. Regardless of 
their age, their affiliation to a cultural group or a reli- 
gious community, these people always report the follow- 
ing similar sequence of events: 


At the beginning, the person concerned sees him- or 
herself stepping out of his or her body. He feels whole, 
even if he was previously missing an arm or a leg. He 
looks down on his dead body from above, perceiving 
every detail exactly - even if he was blind before. Then 
he sees a light that magically attracts him. He then 
walks through a tunnel, in some cases over a mountain 
ridge, towards this light. At the entrance of the light, al- 
ready deceased friends and relatives are waiting for him, 
who greet him warmly. Then he is sent back by them 
because his time has not yet come. He then dives back 
into his body - mostly extremely reluctantly. This is the 
moment when his reanimation is successfully com- 
pleted. After their recovery, people often talk about their 
experiences. 


189 


Elisabeth Ktibler-Ross recorded many of these expe- 
riences. In most cases, however, she accompanied dying 
people to their death. The doctor also made extensive 
notes of what these people told her shortly before death. 
I would like to tell you about one of these conversations," 
Brigitte said. 


"A mother and her two children were seriously in- 
jured in a traffic accident. The mother died at the scene 
of the accident. The children, a little boy and a little girl, 
were taken to two different hospitals. Elisabeth Ktibler- 
Ross reports that she was sitting at the little girl's bed- 
side. Shortly before the little girl died, she said goodbye 
to her with the words: "I'm going now too, Mummy and 
Peter are already here". In fact, the little girl's brother 
had died shortly before, of which Dr Ktibler-Ross was 
later informed by telephone." 


"A near-death experience is very impressive to me," 
Ralf said, "and that is because it is certainly the most 
controlled experience of its kind. I'm talking about the 
near-death experience of Pam Reynolds (1956 - 2010). If 
you want it Manfred, I'll tell you about it now." Manfred 
nodded in agreement and Ralf began to tell: 


"Pam Reynolds was a singer in the USA. In 1991, 
when she was thirty-five years old, doctors had diag- 
nosed an aneurysm at the base of her brain. No one was 
willing to operate on her because of the high risk in- 
volved. Finally, Dr Robert F. Spetzler agreed to operate 


190 


on Pam Reynolds at the Barrow Neurological Institute 
in Phoenix, Arizona. 


During the operation, Pam Reynolds had a near- 
death experience and was resuscitated. The operation 
was successful. After her recovery, Pam Reynolds said 
she stepped out of her body and watched the operation 
for a while, from a position as if she were sitting on the 
surgeon's shoulder. When Dr Spetzler asked for the bone 
saw, she said she was surprised that he was given a tool 
that looked like her electric toothbrush. She imagined a 
saw to be something quite different. Then she heard a 
vascular surgeon who was operating on her thigh say: "I 
can't get any further here; her veins are too narrow". To 
which the surgeon replied: "Try the other side". Pam 
Reynolds explained that she was very surprised about 
this because it was a brain operation and not a leg oper- 
ation. In the further course of her near-death experi- 
ence, Pam Reynolds went through a tunnel to the light. 
There she met her uncle, who had already died, and he 
brought her back to her body. 


The impressive thing about this experience was the 
fact that the bone saw actually had great similarities to 
an electric toothbrush. As it turned out, the communica- 
tion between the doctors that had been recorded during 
the operation had taken place exactly as Pam Reynolds 
had told it. The doctors later confirmed that Pam Reyn- 
olds had not been able to hear or see anything during 
the entire operation. Both her eyes and ears were cov- 
ered with plasters throughout the operation. Pam 


191 


Reynolds' reports therefore had to be based on out-of- 
body perception." 


"I would also like to tell you about another near-death 
experience, Manfred, if you are interested. However, it 
is full of spiritual wisdom. Would you like to hear it?" 
asked Ralf. "Yes, with pleasure, spirituality is really 
starting to interest me," Manfred replied. 


"Fine, then I'll tell you about the near-death experi- 
ence of Mellen Thomas Benedict in 1982. Today Mellen 
Thomas Benedict is in the best of health. Mellen Thomas 
Benedict is an American artist. As he says, he had been 
something of an information freak in the seventies, be- 
coming increasingly concerned about nuclear dangers 
and environmental crises. He was convinced at the time 
that humanity was something of a cancer to the earth 
and thought all humans were cancer. Eventually he con- 
tracted cancer, and a type of cancer that was inoperable. 
Chemotherapy only made him more dependent on care, 
so the doctors gave him six to eight months to live. After 
all possible attempts at alternative healing methods had 
also failed, he decided that his illness was a matter be- 
tween him and God. 


Since he had no connection to spirituality and had 
never thought about God before, he intensively studied 
alternative healing methods as well as religions and phi- 
losophies so as not to be surprised on the other side, as 
he says. Finally, he came to a hospice where he had a 
personal hospice nurse who cared for him sacrificially. 


192 


He wanted to experience his death as consciously as pos- 
sible and refrained from taking painkillers as much as 
possible. He had made an agreement with his hospice 
nurse to leave his dead body alone for six hours, because 
he had read that all kinds of interesting things would 
happen during this period after death. He lasted eight- 
een months. When he woke up one morning at about 
4.30am, he knew he was going to die that day. He called 
a few more friends and his hospice nurse to say goodbye. 
Then he went back to sleep. 


Then suddenly he was fully alert and standing up- 
right, but his body was in bed. Outside his body, he could 
suddenly see much more than he could have ever imag- 
ined. He could see every room of the house and he could 
see the house from above and also from below. There was 
a light and he turned in its direction. The light was so 
wonderful. He knew he would be able to touch it and feel 
it. As he began to move towards the light, he felt like a 
little child running into the open arms of his mother. He 
knew he would be dead when he reached the light. "Wait 
a moment, please," he said, "I would like to think about 
it again. I would like to talk to you once." At that mo- 
ment everything stopped, and the light gradually trans- 
formed into Jesus, into Buddha, into Krishna, into vari- 
ous mandalas and archaic symbols. He wondered what 
was happening here and immediately he got the answer 
that the person's faith creates the impression he gets 
from the light. So, you get a feedback of your own belief. 
He had the desire to really understand the universe. Im- 
mediately the light turned into a mandala of all human 


193 


seas. It was the most wonderful thing he had ever seen. 
A love that cures, heals and regenerates uncondition- 
ally. In that moment, his opinion of human beings was 
changed forever. "Oh God," he said, "I didn't know how 
wonderful we were, on every level high or low." He real- 
ized that there was nothing evil in any soul. The Light 
explained to him, "All that all people strive for is love. 
Love is what sustains them. What consumes people is 
the absence of love." He wondered if humanity would be 
saved. No sooner had he finished this thought than he 
received the answer of the Light. It came to him like a 
drumbeat: "You save and heal yourselves! It has always 
been like this and it will always be like this! “With deep- 
est gratitude in his heart, he entered the light and sud- 
denly knew that his wish to understand the universe 
would be fulfilled. His consciousness expanded rapidly 
and whole groups of galaxies flew by. The whole uni- 
verse was shown to him and he understood it. Then he 
entered a second light and found himself in the void. The 
void was the state that preceded creation. He experi- 
enced that this emptiness is less than nothing and at the 
same time more than everything that exists. Emptiness 
is the chaos that forms all possibilities. It is absolute 
consciousness. This emptiness is the nothingness in all 
atoms, the space between the atoms and their compo- 
nents. This emptiness is both within us and outside of 
us. It is full of energy, an energy that created everything. 
Wherever there is an atom, there is the center of the uni- 
verse. With this understanding, Mellen Thomas Bene- 
dict came back to life. It was clear to him that God is in 


194 


everything and everyone and that God experiences Him- 
self through us. Mellen would have been happy to be just 
one atom. But to be the human part of God, that was for 
him the greatest blessing he could ever imagine. He 
could find no more evil in any human being. 


Of course, these highly interesting descriptions are 
all unverifiable," Ralf explained. "But what is remarka- 
ble about this near-death experience of Mellen Thomas 
Benedict is that he was dead for at least an hour and a 
half. His hospice nurse had found him and determined 
that he was dead. An hour and a half later, he started 
breathing again. After a few weeks, Mellen Thomas Ben- 
edict was feeling better and had a medical check-up. He 
was in perfect health. His cancer had completely disap- 
peared. The doctors called this phenomenon "spontane- 
ous healing" and were relatively unimpressed, as Mellen 
Thomas Benedikt reports. But he himself was im- 
pressed, even if no one else was." 


Manfred had listened with interest the whole time. 
"After all, from what I've heard now, we don't need to be 
afraid of death," he remarked. "Everyone has to decide 
that for themselves," Brigitte replied, "but if a little girl 
knows immediately before she dies that minutes before 
her brother died in another hospital, then in my opinion 
this allows us to conclude that this dying girl was al- 
ready connected to her brother on another energetic 
level, which we cannot consciously perceive. The exist- 
ence of such an energetic level, on which perceptions oc- 
cur intuitively, is also supported by the fact that Pam 


195 


Reynolds was able to describe the situation in the oper- 
ating theatre exactly after her near-death experience.“ 


When the soul leaves the body 


"A completely different proof of psychic energy is pro- 
vided, for example, by Kirlian photography, with which 
one can take pictures of a person's aura. This type of 
high-frequency photography was used by Dr. Konstan- 
tin G. Korotkov from St. Petersburg when he investi- 
gated the question of whether the psychic energy of a 
person, i.e. the soul, leaves the body immediately after 
death. 


Dr. Korotkov took Kirlian photographs of the finger- 
tips of deceased persons at regular intervals of one hour. 


196 


The photographs showed the psychic energy of the aura 
in the form of an arrangement of dots around the finger- 
tip. The results of this research were striking. Dr Korot- 
kov found that the psychic energy of someone who had 
died a peaceful, natural death slowly and steadily dimin- 
ished and was undetectable after thirty-six hours. In 
someone who had died suddenly and unexpectedly, the 
diminution of energy was uneven with a sudden turna- 
round after seventy-two hours. And in someone who had 
died by suicide, the subsiding of energy lasted about a 
week. After years of research, Dr. Korotkov can deter- 
mine the cause of death just by looking at the size and 
arrangement of the energy points in the auric field of the 
fingertip.“ 


Where our identity comes from 


"This also corresponds to the research results of the 
US American cell biologist Bruce Lipton, who has come 
to very interesting results in the course of his twenty 
years of stem cell research, namely it is about the iden- 
tity recognition of the cell. If you look at a hair of yours, 
Manfred, you can interpret it as a hair. But you can also 
interpret it as several thousand cells that are unique in 
the world. They are your cells and you can be quite sure 
that there is no other person in the world who has 


197 


identical hair cells to yours. Of course, this also applies 
to all the other cells in your body. 


Where do you think the signal comes from that cre- 
ates the individual identity of your cells?" Manfred pon- 
dered. "I'll tell you, Manfred. The cell has identity recep- 
tors on its cell membrane. It picks up the signal via the 
receptors that makes this cell your unique, individual 
"Manfred cell'. And this signal comes from outside! It 
comes from the psycho-energetic field. So, we are not ac- 
tually inside ourselves. Our identity comes directly from 
the energy of our origin." 


"Incredible," Manfred snapped, "you mean we're not 
inside ourselves at all?" "That's exactly what Bruce Lip- 
ton found out in his research," Brigitte confirmed to him. 
"Your identity, which makes you a unique being in the 
whole universe, comes directly from the energy of your 
origin, the energy of all-encompassing, unconditional 
love. Every single one of your cells has identity receptors 
that continuously absorb your individual energy of con- 
sciousness from the field. In this way, each one of your 
cells becomes a unique "Manfred Schneider cell". Your 
physical shell is thus "animated" out of the psycho-ener- 
getic field with your individual, eternal energy of con- 
sciousness. And when your present life is over, this, your 
individual energy of consciousness, leaves your mortal 
shell within a few days. Dr. Korotkov has proven this 
with his Kirlian recordings during his many years of re- 
search. 


198 


We experience this again and again in a different 
way, namely in direct dialogue with the subconscious of 
a client who is in a hypnotic deep trance. In this ex- 
panded state of consciousness, the answers to our ques- 
tions come spontaneously and usually with the voice and 
also the facial expressions of a small child. If you ask 
someone in this state whether their existence could ever 
come to an end, they shake with laughter and give a 
clear but uncomprehending "no" as an answer. That's 
exactly the question I asked you during your hypnosis. 
Do you remember?" chortled Brigitte. 


"Yes," Manfred beamed, "that was a funny question 
for me at that moment, so that I had to shake with 
laughter. And I didn't even know in that state why this 
question was so funny, but I suddenly doubled over with 
laughter. When I consciously think about it today, it all 
still seems unbelievable to me. But it was my very own, 
real experience. And the realization that my soul is im- 
mortal, that whatever happens to me, in reality nothing 
can happen to me, that changed my life. Today I live 
much more freely and consciously than before this hyp- 
nosis.“ 


199 


The psycho-energetic field 


"We live in the midst of energy fields that consist of 
many different types of energies. On the one hand, there 
are the electromagnetic waves from radio and wireless 
transmitters and, of course, from our mobile phones, and 
on the other hand, there are the psychic energies. The 
psychic energies are global energies that are emitted 
from the emotions of groups of people. Furthermore, 


200 


there are the energies of our environment, which come 
from the aura fields of the people with whom we have to 
do daily, and finally there is our own life energy, our 
soul, which also cavorts in our aura field. And through 
the energy of our soul we are also directly connected 
with our origin, that is, the energy of all-embracing, un- 
conditional love, as we may experience again and again 
from all hypnotists who are in a deep trance. 


When large groups of people join together and medi- 
tate for peace," Brigitte continued, "the field of con- 
sciousness energy created in this way has an immediate 
and lasting effect on the environment. In many experi- 
ments it proved true that the crime rate of a city drops 
significantly after such a group meditation. If you are 
interested in this, Manfred, you will find a lot of evidence 
for this on the internet. 


Also, of great interest at this point is a research pro- 
ject that began in 1998 at Princeton University and is 
still being carried on today by Dr. Roger Nelson, the 
founder of the project. This project involves about one 
hundred scientists around the world who collect and an- 
alyze data from random generators. These random gen- 
erators regularly show significant swings when large 
groups of people have strong emotions. This can be reg- 
ularly demonstrated, for example, at New Year's Eve 
celebrations around the world by the fact that the ran- 
dom generators show particular spikes here. Particu- 
larly significant increases in the readings could be seen 
on 11 September 2001, when the twin towers of the 


201 


World Trade Center in New York were destroyed. Here, 
the random generators indicated a sudden increase in 
psychic energy hours before the planes hit. The project 
is called the Global Consciousness Project (GPC). It has 
its own website on which the data from the random gen- 
erators distributed all over the world are continuously 
posted. Special events that have taken place since 1998 
and the transmitted data from the random generators 
can also be viewed there. 


So psychic energy influences the measured values of 
the random generators and is also provable in this re- 
spect, even if the long-term project has not yet been fi- 
nally completed and evaluated." 


"That's an incredible number of energies that all 
meet in our aura," Manfred pondered. "And always," he 
mused further. "Twenty-four hours a day, for a lifetime. 
And you don't even notice anything about it." "That's 
right," Brigitte replied. "Well, when we do energetic 
treatments or connect mentally with the energies, we do 
feel the energies very clearly. But otherwise we don't no- 
tice anything of all the energies that overlap in our aura 
field. When the energies overlap, interference patterns 
form, much like the double-slit experiment, remember?" 
Manfred nodded. "And you perceive these interference 
waves unconsciously. The way you perceive these inter- 
ference waves depends on your unconscious programs. 
These interference waves can trigger feelings of deep 
sadness, but also of happiness. It does not even neces- 
sarily depend on which energy waves from which people 


202 


flow into your auric field, but it depends above all on how 
you perceive these waves. If you have a positive, uncon- 
scious program for these waves, then you automatically 
send back positive energy waves in amplified form and 
feel good. If, however, you have a negative, unconscious 
program for these waves, then exactly the opposite hap- 
pens. 


Your individual way of perceiving these energies of 
your environment generates your behavior. This connec- 
tion between the individual perception of a signal from 
the environment and the behavior automatically trig- 
gered by it has also been proven by Bruce Lipton in the 
context of his research work on stem cells. 


Bruce Lipton sees the human being as a community 
of billions of cells. All these cells that make up us are 
controlled by only one, namely our subconscious. In or- 
der to live happily and healthily, we need a continuous 
growth of our cells. After all, millions of cells die every 
day, and they all have to be formed anew. So, we need 
continuous growth. Bruce Lipton has recognized in the 
course of his research that the essential prerequisite for 
the growth of cells comes as a signal from the psycho- 
energetic field. This signal, which is necessary for cell 
growth, is love. So, if you walk around with the feeling 
"Be embraced, millions!" and an inwardly open attitude, 
your cells will grow, and you will be bursting with 
health. 


203 


However, it becomes difficult when your cells receive 
the signals of fear or stress. Then the cells close up and 
go into a protective posture. When the cells are in this 
protective posture, they cannot grow. Your immune sys- 
tem then becomes weaker and you become susceptible to 
all kinds of diseases. If your cells only go into this pro- 
tective mode for a short time, for example because you 
have been terribly angry about something, then it 
doesn't matter. Your body will compensate for this the 
next day through increased growth. It gets really diffi- 
cult, however, when your cells are constantly in their 
protective mode. This is the case, for example, with peo- 
ple who live in constant fear because they might be bul- 
lied by a colleague. In these people, only a small amount 
of cell growth takes place. They are then particularly 
susceptible to infectious diseases and especially to men- 
tal illnesses.“ 


Daily life in the meritocracy 


"We live," Brigitte continued, "in an increasingly per- 
formance-oriented society. A society in which many peo- 
ple are afraid of failing at work because they fear for 
their jobs or are afraid, they are not good enough. At the 
same time, we are constantly reachable and flooded with 
information, all of which has to be processed. In 


204 


addition, we are inundated with advertising in every 
form on every corner. Advertising combined with the of- 
fer of seemingly cheap instalment loans causes many 
people to overextend themselves financially, fueling fur- 
ther anxiety. According to a "Study on the Health of 
Adults in Germany (DEGS)", conducted by Professors 
Wittchen and Jakobi, published on 14 June 2012, every 
third adult German exhibits the symptoms of at least 
one mental disorder. A similar study from 2011, which 
was conducted by the same researchers for Western Eu- 
rope, produced almost identical results. As a conclusion 
from this, we have to realise that we live in a society 
where every third adult is mentally ill." 


"T wouldn't have thought that," Manfred wondered. "I 
would never have thought that possible either," Ralf re- 
plied. "I was almost horrified when I read the study. But 
all that Brigitte has just said in a few words about our 
life situation describes nothing else than signals from 
the psycho-energetic field that are received by our cells 
non-stop." 


"And what can be done about it?" asked Manfred. 
"The problem is not the signal itself," Ralf explained. 
"The real problem is rooted in the unconscious programs 
that lead to the way we perceive this environmental sig- 
nal, and this way of perceiving it then triggers a behav- 
ior. Let me give you a simple example: Imagine you have 
been inundated with advertisements for expensive elec- 
tronic devices, 1.e. mobile phones, PCs and tablet com- 
puters, over the last ten years. Through this aggressive 


205 


advertising, a few subconscious programs have formed 
in you that force you to always buy the latest devices 
with the latest technology. The moment a new device 
with even newer technology comes on the market, your 
subconscious forces you to buy it. You may consciously 
resist for a few weeks, but then the provider beckons 
with a special offer and "comfortable" monthly instal- 
ments. So, you buy the device and have an instalment 
contract. There's nothing wrong with that in principle. 
However, a real problem arises when this is your thirty- 
second instalment contract. At some point it becomes 
very tight financially and the fears increase. 


If the situation is then permanently difficult and re- 
mains so, for example because the manufacturer has in 
the meantime brought three new versions of his device 
onto the market, and the job is possibly still in danger, 
then the path to a mental illness should not be far away. 
Just look at the rapid increase in the number of people 
being treated for burnout. And there are more and more 
all the time." 


"And where do you think that comes from?" asked 
Manfred. "To be honest, I can't give you a definite an- 
swer to this because I simply don't know. The best I can 
do on this subject is to give you my own thoughts and 
assumptions, without any claim to completeness or cor- 
rectness," Ralf answered thoughtfully. "And what are 
your assumptions?" continued Manfred. 


206 


"We have reached a very high standard of living in 
the western industrial nations. Almost every adult and 
even most children have at least one mobile phone. Big 
screen TVs, computers with internet access and cars can 
be found in almost every household. We live in security; 
everyone has a roof over their heads and more than 
enough to eat. We live in paradise conditions compared 
to most other people in the world. However, we have be- 
come so accustomed to all this luxury that most of us no 
longer perceive our comfortable living situation as such. 
Instead, they focus on what they lack or on what they 
are missing. This is how many people experience the 
subjective feelings of lack, loneliness and permanent ex- 
cessive demands in their lives. 


If in 1970 we were still happy to be able to use the 
telephone at the petrol station on the corner for twenty 
pfennigs, today it is often perceived as an acute lack if 
one can only afford an ordinary mobile phone and not 
the smartphone of the latest generation. In addition, we 
are overwhelmed with information. News from all over 
the world can be accessed every minute. We can be 
reached at any time and receive our e-mails, text mes- 
sages and short messages from all kinds of other services 
directly on our mobile phones around the clock. Face-to- 
face conversations are taking place less and less. In- 
stead, communication on the internet or via e-mail is be- 
coming more and more common. It is obviously im- 
mensely important, especially for the young generation, 
to share everything they are doing with their virtual 
friends via social networks on the internet. 


207 


In other words: We work hard to be able to afford 
things we don't really need. Many people become lonely 
in front of their PCs while they tell a thousand virtual 
"friends" what nobody is really interested in. If you buy 
an ice cream in the pedestrian zone of a big German city 
and then shout to the people you meet: "I'm eating a de- 
licious ice cream", you will only get pitying and uncom- 
prehending looks. However, if you type "I'm eating a de- 
licious ice-cream" into your social network, you will re- 
ceive a lot of comments and ratings for this completely 
irrelevant information. 


We now live in a society where we are inundated with 
information, as useless as it may be. On top of that, eve- 
rything is rated or at least commented on in some way. 
The bottom line is that our society has developed so rap- 
idly over the last thirty years that many people are 
simply overwhelmed by it and can no longer find inner 
peace," Ralf ended thoughtfully. 


Creating reality through manifestation 


"How can someone who feels overwhelmed by the hec- 
tic pace of everyday life find inner peace," Manfred 
wanted to know. 


208 


"By being aware of oneself as a human being," Brig- 
itte answered thoughtfully, "and thus of course also of 
one's own needs and desires. In our society today, most 
areas of life are clearly regulated. This applies to the 
world of work as well as to the school system or the 
health and social services. In many cases, this causes 
people to "function" within these rules, thereby relin- 
quishing their personal responsibility, at least in part. 
Of course, all this is not a conscious process, but rather 
a creeping process that results from the power of habit. 
Eventually, the person feels driven by his environment. 
He feels more and more overwhelmed and is perma- 
nently dissatisfied with himself and his life. But he usu- 
ally cannot even say why this is so. 


If someone in such a situation were to ask me how he 
could change it, I would probably make the following 
suggestion: 


e Take a time-out of at least one week in which 
you can be completely alone with yourself and 
your thoughts. Don't worry, the world will not 
end if you are not available to anyone for a 
week. 


e Spend your time out in a place where you feel 
particularly comfortable. Be it a mountain hut 
or a holiday home by the sea, just the way you 
like it best. Of course, you can also spend your 
time-out at your home, but then you should 
turn off the doorbell. 


209 


Forget about communication devices such as 
telephones, mobile phones, tablet computers 
or PCs for this week, and don't turn on the TV 
or radio. 


Focus your attention on the nature that sur- 
rounds you and take it in as consciously as 
possible. Here, especially during the first few 
days, you will probably keep thinking about 
people you absolutely have to tell something to 
and things that urgently need to be done. Just 
let these thoughts flow freely and continue to 
concentrate on nature, on trees, animals, the 
sky, the mountains or the waves. You will 
probably find this very exhausting, but, hang 
in there! 


After a few days, you will notice that your 
thoughts will become more and more detached 
from your everyday life. Your guilty con- 
science because of all the things you have left 
undone will also come up less and less often. 
Now the inner struggle that you had with 
yourself during the first few days gradually 
subsides. You notice that you are becoming 
calmer and calmer and perhaps also that you 
feel more and more connected to the nature 
that surrounds you. 


The more you find your inner peace, the less 
important the problems of everyday life seem 


210 


to you, until they finally appear only as spo- 
radic thoughts that quickly pass. At some 
point, the time comes when you consciously 
perceive yourself as someone sitting in your 
seat and letting your thoughts about your life 
flow freely. Memories of the past come up, per- 
haps of your childhood. Your thoughts come 
and go, completely unintentionally and with- 
out any effort. After a while, you will notice 
that you literally revel in your thoughts of the 
beautiful memories, while the memories of 
painful events also come, but usually without 
any emotion. 


Then, when you have wallowed in your pleas- 
ant memories long enough, thoughts of your 
future automatically come to you. There are no 
memories here and you realize that your pre- 
sent physical life will come to an end one day 
in the distant future. The question may come 
to your mind whether there is life after death. 
You can answer this question for yourself in 
your state of complete peace and relaxation. 
Just try to imagine that your entire existence 
ceases with physical death. Try it calmly. The 
harder you try, the less you will succeed. Na- 
ture has probably built in something like an 
insurmountable barrier here. An absolute end 
of being is not conceivable for anyone, no mat- 
ter how hard they try to create this idea. 


211 


Just try to imagine that everything that 
makes up your whole being lives on un- 
changed and eternally as the individual en- 
ergy of your soul after the death of your phys- 
ical body. You will find that this idea comes 
completely easily to you and seems absolutely 
natural. And it is precisely this idea of the in- 
finity of the soul that is substantiated by the 
research findings of Doctor Korotkov and 
Bruce Lipton, as well as by the extensive re- 
search into near-death experiences. This idea 
is also confirmed again and again in the hyp- 
noses we carry out. What incredible perspecti- 
ves this opens up for your life?! 


You cannot change the past. However, you can 
use the experiences you have made in the past 
to shape your future the way you want it to be. 
But what do you want your future to look like? 
Perhaps you can listen deeply to yourself in 
this minute of absolute peace and imagine how 
you would like to spend your time between the 
present moment and the time of your death. 
Since your soul lives on after your physical 
death, you do not have to fear it. So just dream 
yourself into your future life. Maybe you will 
ask yourself questions like: "What do I really 
want? What do I dare to want? Am I entitled 
to shape my life the way I would like to shape 
it according to my own free will?" And if at this 
point a big "Yes, but ..." arises, then perhaps 


212 


you should also ask yourself the following 
questions: "Who bears the responsibility for 
my life? Does it lie with myself or with others?" 
If you then come to the conclusion that the sole 
responsibility for your life lies with yourself, 
then the following questions may come to your 
mind: "Do I, for my part, take responsibility 
for the way other people shape their lives? And 
if so, am I perhaps preventing these people 
from shaping their own lives in their own way? 
Am I perhaps, out of sheer habit, holding on to 
life situations that I would like to change from 
deep within myself? Is that perhaps why I am 
so dissatisfied? Do I actually treat myself and 
other people with respect? Do I have the cour- 
age to change my life?" Well, go for it! 


If you are inwardly ready to change your life 
situation in full respect for yourself and for 
other people so that your life is fulfilled and 
happy, then accept your new life situation now 
firmly and with all its consequences for you. 
Feel into your new life and perceive it as your 
reality. Take the time you need for this con- 
scious and intensive manifestation of your 
new life situation, be it a few hours or a few 
days. The energy waves that you are now 
sending out through your aura are now being 
absorbed as part of the psycho-energetic field 
by every other person and everything that ex- 
ists. The people who are close to you or belong 


213 


to your environment will unconsciously react 
to this by sending out interference waves, 
which in turn interact with your energy field. 
In this way, what you have resolved for your 
own life with your own free will becomes lived 
reality. In what you manifest for yourself in 
this way, however, you should always make 
sure that you do not energetically influence 
another person against their will. If, for exam- 
ple, you are looking for a partner, then please 
manifest that you meet the partner who suits 
you best. Please remain neutral and do not fo- 
cus on any particular person in order to avoid 
energetic encroachment. 


If you have dealt with yourself and your life 
situation so intensively and the changes you 
have manifested have become your reality, 
then the time has come when you should end 
your time-out and return to society. It will cer- 
tainly be just as hectic and overloaded with in- 
formation as it was before your time-out. But 
you will perceive all this in a completely dif- 
ferent way from a deep, inner security and no 
longer as a burden. The people you have to 
deal with day after day will meet you in a dif- 
ferent way than before your time out. After 
you have made the changes you have mani- 
fested, your satisfaction with your life will also 
increase from day to day.“ 


214 


Manfred and Ralf had listened intently the whole 
time without interrupting Brigitte once. "You mean," 
Manfred looked at Brigitte questioningly, "that if I had 
taken time out like this, I could have solved my problem 
with jealousy myself?" 


"The cause of your problem was buried deep in your 
subconscious," Brigitte replied. "You had brought a trau- 
matizing experience from a previous life, namely the loss 
of Karlotta, into this life with you, just as we all carry 
within us the experiences our souls have ever had. In 
your case, however, the trauma that had caused this ex- 
perience had not yet been resolved. During your hypno- 
sis your subconscious mind assumed that it was a past 
life experience and that an experience is always some- 
thing positive because it is based on something learned. 
And since an experience that is already there does not 
have to be had a second time, your subconscious was 
able to dissolve the trauma. This all took place in direct 
dialogue with your subconscious while you were in the 
altered state of consciousness of a deep trance. 


During such a time-out, which I have just described, 
you reach a meditative state of consciousness, i.e. a deep, 
inner calm, which could also be called a "light trance". 
In this state you can think very calmly and clearly about 
your life and your goals and form new, unconscious pro- 
grams by intensively manifesting these goals. In this 
way you can very consciously give your life a new direc- 
tion. 


215 


In your case, there was an unconscious program that 
repeatedly triggered the behavior "jealousy". Since nei- 
ther a deep trance nor communication with the subcon- 
scious is possible during our time-out, you would hardly 
have been able to solve your problem with this method," 
Brigitte explained. 


The spiritual world 


Manfred nodded. "I will remember one experience 
during my deep trance all my life," he explained. His 
eyes literally lit up. "And that was the feeling of abso- 
lute, inner security and the certainty of being connected 
to everything. That was the case, for example, when you 
asked me in hypnosis if I could ever die. I remember that 
I suddenly had to literally shake with laughter, that's 
how funny I found this question." 


216 


"Yes," Ralf confirmed, "we experience something like 
that all the time during our hypnoses. Our deceased are 
not gone, they live on as souls. They can even take con- 
tact with us and we with them. By the way, the same 
applies to angels and beings of light. It is only a question 
of intuition and the state of consciousness we are in at 
the moment. Sometimes this happens intuitively when 
we are absent for a moment or in a dream. Such commu- 
nication with the spiritual world is also possible in hyp- 
nosis, but only when the hypnotist is in a deep trance. 
One can ask for general information here, but also for 
advice and help. The answers we receive here, however, 
are mostly Solomonic. This is simply because we have 
come into this life to be able to have the experiences, we 
want to have with our own free will. So, nobody wants to 
influence us, but we do get all the help we need, but only 
if we specifically ask for it," Ralf added. 


"A few days after the hypnosis I had a wonderful 
dream," Manfred agreed thoughtfully. "Before I tell you 
about it, you must first know what happened before. 


When I was a little boy, just twelve to be exact, my 
dad was very sick. I prayed and prayed for my dad to get 
well. I always looked at the clock and hoped that the 
night would pass quickly. At 8:46 pm I couldn't keep my 
eyes open any longer and dozed off for a short moment. 
At that moment my dad died. And I have been silently 
reproaching myself all my life for nodding off and per- 
haps not praying enough. 


217 


The dream I had the other day was so real and so 
clear, just as I saw and felt everything in hypnosis. I was 
lying in my bed and praying. Then my dad came towards 
me. When I looked at him, I was terribly frightened at 
first, because I thought I had done something wrong. My 
dad looked at me very mildly and reassuringly. At that, 
he lifted me out of my cot and asked, "Shall I show you 
where I am now?" I replied, "Yes, Papa," and snuggled 
up close to him. Then he floated with me into a beautiful, 
warm light. Suddenly I was one with everything. Every- 
thing was so familiar to me. I felt completely accepted 
and safe. It was an indescribably beautiful feeling. My 
dad was with me and showed me everything. "Do you 
understand now that there is nothing to worry about?" 
he asked. And I understood. We stayed in that light for 
quite a while. Then my dad took me back to my little 
bed." Manfred smiled pensively and had tears in his 
eyes. "Can you imagine something like that?" he asked 
softly, looking up. 


"Yes," Brigitte answered softly, "we can imagine that 
very well. Your father has passed away. Thus, as a per- 
son, as "organic matter", he is no longer of our physical 
world, where we can see and touch everything. But as 
an individual energy of consciousness, as a soul, he is 
very much still there, just like all our deceased. He is 
now in another form of existence, namely in a disembod- 
ied one. He isa spiritual personality with all the feelings 
and experiences that make him a personality. And he is 
free from the limitations of time and space as we per- 
ceive these dimensions. So, he is not gone, but in the 


218 


midst of us, only as an individual, psychic energy. And 
as such a psychic energy, your father is connected to all 
people on the level of the subconscious. And because you 
were so sad for decades, he has now shown you through 
your subconscious in a dream that he is well." 


Manfred swallowed. "The world we consciously per- 
ceive every day is much smaller than what constitutes 
our true reality," Manfred mused. 


KRREKKKEK 


The secret of life 


Every human being fathoms the secret of life in his or 
her very own way. On these pages we have presented 
our personal experiences that we have had and continue 
to have with our method of energetic hypnosis. These are 
deeply moving and at the same time full of perspectives 
for life. 


However, the deep cause that underlies these experi- 
ences from our communications with the subconscious 
remains closed to us. It is not tangible despite the most 
intensive efforts with the analytical mind. In this 


219 


respect, we are not afraid to call this all-connecting ele- 
mental force "God", following Max Planck. Here we have 
the deep, inner certainty that God, in his infinite great- 
ness and unconditional love, is completely indifferent to 
how the individual sees him, be it as a man, as a woman, 
as a father or mother, as an all-connecting energy or as 
the universe. And there is still a deep, inner certainty in 
us: God is in us, in each of us. We are never alone, but 
surrounded by angels and beings of light with whom we 
can intuitively connect at any time. Each person is al- 
lowed in this life, with their own free will, to experience 
and have the experiences they want to have. Each of us 
is an active part of creation. 


Literature list 


e Bruce Lipton, 
Intelligent cells 
ISBN 978-3-936862-88-1 
KOHA — Verlag GmbH, Burgrain. 


e Elisabeth Kibler-Ross 
About death and the afterlife 
ISBN 3-923 781-02-4 
Verlag: Die Silberschnur GmbH, Gillesheim. 


e Pim van Lommel 
Endless consiousness 
ISBN 978-3-426-87624-4, Verlag 


220 


Th. Knaur Nachf. GmbH & Co.KG, Miinchen 


e Max Planck 
Archive on the History of the Max Planck Society, 
Abt. Va, Rep. 11 Planck, Nr. 1797. 


Interesting web links 


Quantum teleportation / nuclear research 


e = http://www.spiegel.de/wissenschaft/tech- 
nik/quantenverschraenkung-forscher-tele- 
portieren-licht-ueber-143-kilometer-a- 
854278.html 


e = http://www.spiegel.de/wissenschaft/mensch/mys- 
terioeses-quantenphaenomen-einsteins-spuk-ist- 
tausende-male-schneller-als-das-licht-a- 
572068.html 


221 


e = =http://www.na- 
ture.com/news/2008/080813/full/news.2008.1038 
-html 


e = http://www.home.web.cern.ch/about 


The psychoenergetic field: 
e http://www.noosphere.princeton.edu 
e = http://www.korotkov.org 


e = http://www.mellen-thomas.com 


222 


About the authors 


Is what we can see, feel and touch all that constitutes 
our reality? Or is there perhaps a much greater, all-en- 
compassing reality of which we are a part? And what if 
we could perceive this spiritual reality? 


At the age of about 35, Brigitte PapenfuB (*1957) and 
Ralf Mooren (*1959) began to pursue these questions 


223 


independently of each other. They completed training in 
Far Eastern healing methods and attended spiritual 
seminars all over the world. After they met at one of 
these seminars, they also completed extensive training 
in therapeutic hypnosis. Over the years, by combining 
classical hypnosis and spiritual energy work, the au- 
thors developed their own highly effective form of ther- 
apy, which has achieved remarkable success: SOL hyp- 
nosis. Since 2001 Brigitte PapenfuB and Ralf Mooren 
have been running the therapy and training centre for 
hypnosis and mental energetics "SOL Spirit of Light" 
(www.spirit-of-light.de) in Monchengladbach in Ger- 
many. 


224 


Notes 


225 


226 


227